 
 
 
Course Syllabus 
CIS*3210 Computer Networks F (3-1) [0.50] 
School of Computer Science, University of Guelph, Guelph 
Fall Semester | 2019 
 
 
1. INSTRUCTIONAL SUPPORT 
Instructor Information 
Instructor Name Office  Phone Email 
Dr. Xiaodong Lin Reynolds 2210 X53889 xlin08@uoguelph.ca 
Office Hours:      Monday/Wednesday, 3:30 pm - 5:00 pm or by appointment 
 
Prerequisite(s): CIS*3110. 
Credit Weight: 0.5 
 
Teaching Assistant Name Email 
Fatemeh Safari safarif@uoguelph.ca 
Office Hours: TBD 
 
Teaching Assistant Name Email 
Hanwen Zheng hzheng01@uoguelph.ca 
Office Hours: TBD 
 
Lectures 
Day Time Location 
Monday/Wednesday/Friday 02:30PM - 03:20PM RICH, Room 2529 
 
Labs 
Day Time Location 
Monday 10:30AM - 11:20AM JTP, Room 2266 
 
Note: Unless otherwise stated, the lab will be used for advising and consulting with the Teaching 
Assistant, including the review of key knowledge and skills essential for solving programming 
assignments as well as hands-on Wireshark practice labs and written homework. 
2. LEARNING RESOURCES 
 
Textbook 
• Computer Networking: A Top-Down Approach, 7th ed. J. Kurose and K. Ross 
The seventh edition of this book was published in 2016. Students having a copy of an older 
edition may be able to get by, but please get the latest edition if you intend to purchase the 
textbook. Homework problems may refer to numbered problems or figures in the text, so make 
sure you have access to the latest edition through a classmate if you intend to get by with an 
older edition. 
 
Reference resources 
• Beej's Guide to Network Programming: Using Internet Sockets 
Available at: https://beej.us/guide/bgnet/ 
• TCP/IP Sockets in C: Practical Guide for Programmers 2/e 
Michael J. Donahoo and Kenneth L. Calvert 
Morgan Kaufmann, ISBN: 0-123-74540-3 
http://cs.baylor.edu/~donahoo/practical/CSockets/ 
• TCP/IP Tutorial and Technical Overview 
IBM Corporation 
Available at: https://www.redbooks.ibm.com/pubs/pdfs/redbooks/gg243376.pdf 
 
Course Website 
Course material, news, announcements, and grades will be regularly posted to the CIS*3210 
website which can be found on Courselink. It is the student’s responsibility to check these pages 
frequently for new information or updates. 
• Lecture Information: Selected notes will be posted on the course website as instructors 
have time to make them available. You are expected to take your own notes during lecture. 
• Labs and Tutorials: Selected tutorial and lab materials will be available on the course 
website. 
• Assignments: Assignment descriptions will be posted on the course website. Assignments 
are submitted via the course website. 
 
Course Description 
Computer networking has become increasingly important as we become more dependent on the 
Internet. The Internet is becoming more integrated in our lives. An increasingly large number of 
people rely on the Internet to communicate with one another, search for information on the most 
diverse topics, shop online, etc. It is therefore important for computer scientists and computer 
engineers to be familiar with the fundamentals as well as practices of computer networking. This 
course covers the high-level (protocol) oriented aspects of computer networks, specifically: 
application, session, transport and network layers. It includes the Internet, socket-level 
programming, multimedia and quality of service issues. The hardware aspects (switches, LANs, 
modems, transmission paths) are only covered at a functional level. 
Please see The Academic Calendar for more details. The Academic Calendars are the source of 
information about the University of Guelph’s procedures, policies and regulations which apply to 
undergraduate, graduate and diploma programs: 
http://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/index.cfm?index 
3. COURSE OUTCOMES 
 
On the successful completion of the course, students will be able to: 
1. Define and describe the layered structure of a typical networking architecture  
2. Identify the key components of a network  
3. Describe the components of IPv4 and IPv6 protocols, including addressing, routing and 
forwarding  
4. Evaluate error detection/correction mechanisms in different network contexts  
5. Judge the effectiveness of existing or similar network protocols  
6. Implement network applications using reliable and unreliable socket communication  
7. Analyze network traffic using Wireshark  
8. Describe common network vulnerabilities and exploits, as well as the methods for 
mitigating them 
 
4. COURSE TOPICS 
 
Introduction  
The Application Layer  
The Transport Layer  
The Network Layer: Data Plane 
The Network Layer: Control Plane 
The Link Layer and Local Area Networks  
Fundamentals of Networking Security 
Wireless Networks 
 
5. EVALUATION METHOD 
 
Final grade calculation 
In determining the overall grade of the course, the following weights will be used: 
 
Coursework Amount % of Grade 
Programming assignments 2 22 
hands-on lab exercises 4 25 
Written homework 4 8 
Midterm exam 1 15 
Final exam 1 30 
  
▪ Programming assignments: 22%, where 
➢ Assignment 1: 12% Due October 11 
➢ Assignment 2: 10% Due November 15 
▪ Hands-on lab exercises: 25%, where  
➢ Lab exercise 1: 4% Due September 20 
➢ Lab exercise 2: 7% Due October 15 
➢ Lab exercise 3: 8% Due November 6 
➢ Lab exercise 4: 6% Due November 30 
▪ Written homework: 8%  
➢ The schedule of written assignments will be determined according to the progress 
within the course. There are total four written assignments for the Computer 
Networks course this Fall. Only three of them will be marked and the choice is at 
the instructor's discretion. 4% each. 
➢ Two best homework out of three will be selected. Your two highest marks for the 
assignments will be counted towards your final grade. 
▪ Mid-term Exam: 15% October 23 
▪ Final Exam: 30% TBA by Registrar 
 
The final grade is the weighted sum of all assessments shown above, using the weights indicated 
in the table above. 
 
Course Grading Policies 
Development environment: Systems and software are provided in the lab and the SoCS Linux 
servers for use in assignments. Students who choose to develop their assignments on other systems 
and/or with other versions of software are fully responsible for ensuring compatibility with the 
SoCS Linux server environment for marking purposes. 
 
Late assignments: All assignments are due at 11:59 PM on the due date. Barring truly exceptional 
circumstances, submissions after the deadline will not be accepted, unless an extension has been 
negotiated in advance of the deadline date. Any work that is late without approval will receive 
zero. 
 
Compiler errors/warnings: Program code which does not compile will not be accepted for 
marking and a grade of zero (0) will be assigned. Code that does not compile “clean” will lose 
marks for compiler warnings. Code must compile and run on the SoCS servers. 
 
Submission policy: All assignments will be only be accepted via submission through Courselink 
unless otherwise indicated on the assignment by the instructor. Failure to submit assignments 
correctly (e.g., incorrect file names, faulty/missing makefile, etc.) will result in a mark penalty. 
 
Regrades: Students may request a reassessment of their assignments in writing and specify the 
reasons for such requests. Their entire assignment will be reassessed, and the reassessment may 
result in raising or lowering of the original marks. Remark requests will only be accepted up to 5 
calendar days from the release of the assignment mark. Please carefully read through the 
comments made by the marker on Courselink before sending a remark request. 
 
Missed Assessments: If you are unable to meet an in-course requirement due to medical, 
psychological, or compassionate reasons, please make an appointment to meet your course 
instructor. Please see below for specific details and consult the undergraduate calendar for 
information on regulations and procedures for Academic Consideration: 
http://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-ac.shtml 
 
Note: There are no makeup assignments or midterm exams. If you miss an assessment and 
have documentation to show that you are eligible for Academic Consideration, the weight of the 
assessment will be moved to the final exam. 
 
Accommodation of Religious Obligations: If you are unable to meet an in-course requirement 
due to religious obligations, please email the instructor within two weeks of the start of the 
semester to make alternate arrangements. See the undergraduate calendar for information on 
regulations and procedures for Academic Accommodation of Religious Obligations: 
http://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-accomrelig.shtml 
 
Plagiarism Policy: All work submitted must be your own. Regarding programming assignments, 
you may discuss assignment strategies openly (including online). You can also search the Internet 
for strategies and code examples. However, when writing the actual code, you must do all of 
the work yourself. Submission of program code for an assignment that is written by another 
person, or in collaboration with another person (unless explicitly stated otherwise in the 
assignment, for example, group assignments) also constitutes Academic Dishonesty. Similarities 
between assignment submissions are monitored using the program MOSS (Measure of Software 
Similarity) as well as by manual means. 
 
Exams: Course examinations will be based on material discussed in the course lectures. Simply 
reading the course notes will not be adequate preparation for the exams. Written homework will be 
provided during the course and placed on the course website. Attempting these is one valuable tool 
for you to reinforce concepts that were taught in class and assess your understanding of the course 
material, preparing yourself for exams. The exams are closed book and include a mix of multiple-
choice, true/false, and short answer questions. 
 
Special Note: 
 
• All cases of academic misconduct are handled by the Dean, in conjunction with the School 
Director. Successive infractions of misconduct affirmed by this process could have consequences 
as serious as expulsion from the University. For details please see related pages in the University 
of Guelph Undergraduate Calendar 2019-2020. 
• Requests for academic consideration because of illness or of a compassionate nature must be 
made in writing and accompanied by certification whenever possible. 
  
6. STANDARD STATEMENTS  
The following are standard statements for inclusion on all course outlines (adapted with permission 
from the College of Arts). Some departments or colleges may also elect to post this information 
on a common website and link to such sites in the course outline. However, it is strongly 
recommended that statements on academic misconduct and links to the academic misconduct 
section of the academic calendars are included on all course outlines.  
E-mail Communication 
As per university regulations, all students are required to check their <mail.uoguelph.ca> e-mail 
account regularly: e-mail is the official route of communication between the University and its 
students.  
When You Cannot Meet a Course Requirement 
When you find yourself unable to meet an in-course requirement because of illness or 
compassionate reasons, please advise the course instructor (or designated person, such as a 
teaching assistant) in writing, with your name, id#, and e-mail contact. See the undergraduate 
calendar for information on regulations and procedures for Academic Consideration.  
Drop Date 
Students will have until the last day of classes to drop courses without academic penalty. The 
regulations and procedures for course registration are available in their respective Academic 
Calendars. 
Copies of out-of-class assignments 
Keep paper and/or other reliable back-up copies of all out-of-class assignments: you may be 
asked to resubmit work at any time.  
 
Accessibility 
The University promotes the full participation of students who experience disabilities in their 
academic programs. To that end, the provision of academic accommodation is a shared 
responsibility between the University and the student.  
When accommodations are needed, the student is required to first register with Student 
Accessibility Services (SAS). Documentation to substantiate the existence of a disability is 
required, however, interim accommodations may be possible while that process is underway.  
Accommodations are available for both permanent and temporary disabilities. It should be noted 
that common illnesses such as a cold or the flu do not constitute a disability.  
Use of the SAS Exam Centre requires students to book their exams at least 7 days in advance, and 
not later than the 40th Class Day. More information: www.uoguelph.ca/sas  
Academic Misconduct 
The University of Guelph is committed to upholding the highest standards of academic integrity 
and it is the responsibility of all members of the University community – faculty, staff, and students 
– to be aware of what constitutes academic misconduct and to do as much as possible to prevent 
academic offences from occurring. University of Guelph students have the responsibility of 
abiding by the University's policy on academic misconduct regardless of their location of study; 
faculty, staff and students have the responsibility of supporting an environment that discourages 
misconduct. Students need to remain aware that instructors have access to and the right to use 
electronic and other means of detection.  
Please note: Whether or not a student intended to commit academic misconduct is not relevant for 
a finding of guilt. Hurried or careless submission of assignments does not excuse students from 
responsibility for verifying the academic integrity of their work before submitting it.  
Students who are in any doubt as to whether an action on their part could be construed as an 
academic offence should consult with a faculty member or faculty advisor.  
The Academic Misconduct Policy is detailed in the Undergraduate Calendar.  
Recording of Materials 
Presentations which are made in relation to course work—including lectures—cannot be 
recorded or copied without the permission of the presenter, whether the instructor, a classmate or 
guest lecturer. Material recorded with permission is restricted to use for that course unless further 
permission is granted.  
Resources 
The Academic Calendars are the source of information about the University of Guelph’s 
procedures, policies and regulations which apply to undergraduate, graduate and diploma 
programs.  
 
