1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACCT 3280 
Auditing I 
Fall 2019 
0.5 Credits 
  
General Course Information 
Instructors: 
Mary Jo Fedy (Section 01) 
Adeel Mahmood (Section 02) 
Email Mary Jo Fedy: mfedy@uoguelph.ca 
Adeel Mahmood: mahmood@uoguelph.ca 
Office Location  MAC 217 
Office Hours  After class, or by appointment 
Department/School Department of Management 
  
Class Schedule:  
Section 01: Mondays and Wednesdays from 8.30 AM to 9.50 AM 
Section 02: Wednesdays from 7.00 PM to 9.50 PM 
Pre-requisites: ACCT  3330 
Restrictions: - 
Course Description  
Auditing I is an examination of the principles and theory underlying the practice of auditing.  
Concepts of materiality and audit risk are examined and discussed.  Sources and techniques for 
gathering auditing evidence will also be examined.  Modern organizations rely on information 
systems, technology and internal controls to manage and monitor their operations and the 
impact of these systems on the quality of information produced and on the scope of audits are 
important elements of this course. 
Course Learning Outcomes    
Upon successfully completing this course, you will be able to: 
1. Compare the use and purpose of the different types of assurance engagements. 
2. Apply relevant ethical and legal principles to situations involving ethical or legal 
elements. 
3. Identify and assess issues related to the acceptance of an audit engagement. 
4. Demonstrate how to gain an understanding of an audit client and its internal control in 
order to assess the risk of material misstatement through error or fraud, set materiality 
appropriately, and devise an overall audit strategy. 
5. Assess the risks of the project, or, for audit engagements, assesses the risks of 
material misstatement at the financial statement level and at the assertion level for 
2 
 
classes of transactions, account balances, and disclosures. 
6. Assess risks at an assertion level and plan suitable evidence-gathering procedures, 
including tests of controls, substantive tests of details, and analytical procedures. 
7. Evaluate audit evidence and results of audit tests. 
8. Describe analytical procedures appropriate for the identified risk of material 
misstatement. 
9. Describe the procedures required to complete an audit and formulate an opinion in 
support of an appropriate audit report. 
 
During this course you will also practice and develop the following skills, in 
accordance CPA Competency Map: 
• Demonstrate a cohesive process for using professional judgment to solve problems 
and make decisions. (Competency Map – Section 2.1) 
• Write and speak to enhance work performed (Competency Map – Section 3.2) 
• Work effectively as a team member.  (Competency Map – Section 5.2) 
 
Summary of Course Content and Materials 
Date Chapters/Topics/Deliverables Due* 
Week 
of Sep 9 
• Introduction 
• Ch. 3: Professional Ethics and Legal Liability 
- 
Week 
of Sep 
16 
• Ch. 4: Audit Responsibilities and Objectives 
• Ch. 6: Client Acceptance, Planning, and Materiality 
Q1 
Week 
of Sep 
23 
• Ch. 7: Assessing the Risk of Material Misstatement  
• Ch. 8: Internal Control and COSO Framework 
Q2 
ICA1 
Week 
of Sep 
30 
• Ch. 9: Assessing Control Risks and Designing Tests of Controls 
• Ch. 10: Develop Risk Response: Audit Strategy and Audit Program 
Q3 
ICA2 
Week 
of Oct 7 
• Ch. 11: Audit Sampling Concepts ICA3 
Oct 16, 
2019 
MIDTERM TEST (Written on Campus) - 
Week 
of Oct 
21 
• Ch. 5: Audit Evidence 
• Ch. 16: Audit of the Capital Acquisition and Repayment Cycle 
- 
3 
 
Week 
of Oct 
28 
• Ch. 12: Audit of the Revenue Cycle 
• Ch. 17: Audit of Cash Balances 
Project Proposal Due by 11.59 PM Guelph Time on Oct 31, 2019 
Q4 
ICA4 
Week 
of Nov 
4 
• Ch. 13: Audit of the Acquisition and Payment Cycle 
• Ch. 14: Audit of the Inventory and Distribution Cycle 
Q5 
ICA5 
Week 
of Nov 
11 
• Ch. 15: Audit of the Human Resources and Payroll Cycle 
• Ch. 18: Completing the Audit 
ICA6 
Week 
of Nov 
18 
• Ch. 19: Audit Reports on Financial Statements 
• Ch. 20: Other Assurance and Non-assurances Services  
GROUP PROJECT Due by 11.59 PM Guelph Time on Nov 24, 2019 
Q6 
Week 
of Nov 
25 
• Review - 
- FINAL EXAM as Scheduled by the Office of the Registrar  
* Q1, Q2, etc. refer to Online Quizzes, while ICA1, ICA2, etc. refer to In-Class Activities.  See 
below for more detail. 
 
Course Assessment 
 . 
 
 
Associated Learning 
Outcomes 
Due Date / 
Location 
Assessment 1:  5% Online Quizzes  LO 3, 4, 5, 6 
Refer to schedule 
/ Online 
     
Assessment 2:  10% In-Class Activities LO 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 
Refer to schedule 
/ In Class 
     
Assessment 3: 25% Midterm Test LO 2 – 5 
Oct 16, 2019 / In 
class 
     
Assessment 4: 20% Group Project LO 4, 5, 8 
Proposal: Oct 31, 
2019 / online 
 
Project: Nov 24, 
2019 / online 
     
4 
 
Assessment 5: 40% Final Exam LO 1 – 7, 9 
Dec 12, 2019 / 
On campus 
     
Total  100% 
 
 
 
 
 
Teaching and Learning Practices   
Lectures Learning in this course results primarily from in-class discussion and 
problem-solving, and out-of-class analysis and group work.  Students will be 
encouraged to think, analyze, evaluate, and solve problems – that is, not 
memorize.  Students are expected to come to class on time and be prepared 
for the class (having read the assigned reading and done the associated 
problems). 
A list of suggested homework problems is provided online on the course 
website along with the solutions.  These problems provide excellent review 
of the key concepts discussed in class.   
Online Quizzes There are six (6) quizzes in total in a multiple-choice format, and they are 
due online by the start of the class they are scheduled for.  Each quiz will 
have test-style questions and will be timed when written online.  The best 
five (5) grades out of six will be used in computing your mark for this 
component. 
In-Class 
Activities 
In-Class Activities are problem-solving activities conducted in class on the 
scheduled topic, allowing students to participate and get graded on their 
performance in the activity.  More details of the format, structure, and 
content coverage will be provided during the term. 
There are six (6) such activities in total, and they are completed in groups.  
The best five (5) grades out of six will be used in computing your mark for 
this component.  See Group Project below for information on group 
formation. 
Midterm Test The Midterm Test is written on campus on an individual basis.  The test will 
cover introduction plus chapters 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11.   
Final Exam The Final Exam is also written on campus on an individual basis.  The exam 
will cover all course content including chapters 3 to 20. 
Group Project Students will form groups for this component.  The group will also complete 
the In-Class Activities above.   
The Group Project will allow the students an opportunity to engage in audit 
planning for a reference company, perform audit data analytics, and submit 
a report documenting their work. 
As a part of the project deliverables, each student group will submit a 
proposal outlining the reference company and the rationale for selecting it.  
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The company will be used to provide the context for audit planning and data 
analytics.   
Course Resources 
Required Text:       
Arens, et. al., Auditing: The Art & Science of Assurance Engagements, 14th Canadian Edition, 
Pearson Canada, 2018: 
• The text may be purchased in a physical or an online ‘eBook’ version.  Note that the e-
book purchase may not provide permanent access. 
• ISBN: 9780134894805 (Hard cover), 9780134897141 (Loose leaf), 9780134835013 (E-
book access card) 
CPA Canada Handbook: 
• Electronic access to the CPA Canada Handbook can be obtained through the 
University of Guelph library.  A hardcopy version is not recommended. 
 
Course Policies 
Grading Policies 
 
If a student misses a quiz or the Midterm Test for a valid reason, the weight of the missed quiz 
or test will be added to that of the Final Exam.  A student missing the Final Exam is subject to 
the same policies and procedures as those outlined in the Academic Calendar for missed final 
exams. 
 
It is expected that all group members contribute equally to group work.  If peer evaluations 
completed at the end of the course indicate otherwise, individual group members may not 
receive the same marks as the group marks.  
 
If a group misses the Group Project deadline for a valid reason applicable to each group 
member, a deadline extension may be granted.  Otherwise, there is a 25% marks penalty for 
every 24 hours (or a fraction rounded UP) that the Group Project is submitted late.  Each group 
member must provide the instructor with the required documentation within one week of the 
missed submission deadline. 
 
University Policies  
Academic Consideration 
When you find yourself unable to meet an in-course requirement because of illness or 
compassionate reasons, please advise the course instructor in writing, with your name, id#, 
and e-mail contact. See the academic calendar for information on regulations and procedures 
6 
 
for Academic Consideration: 
http://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-ac.shtml 
Academic Misconduct 
The University of Guelph is committed to upholding the highest standards of academic integrity 
and it is the responsibility of all members of the University community, faculty, staff, and 
students  to be aware of what constitutes academic misconduct and to do as much as possible 
to prevent academic offences from occurring.  
University of Guelph students have the responsibility of abiding by the University's policy on 
academic misconduct regardless of their location of study; faculty, staff and students have the 
responsibility of supporting an environment that discourages misconduct. Students need to 
remain aware that instructors have access to and the right to use electronic and other means 
of detection. Please note: Whether or not a student intended to commit academic misconduct 
is not relevant for a finding of guilt. Hurried or careless submission of assignments does not 
excuse students from responsibility for verifying the academic integrity of their work before 
submitting it. Students who are in any doubt as to whether an action on their part could be 
construed as an academic offence should consult with a faculty member or faculty advisor.  
The Academic Misconduct Policy is detailed in the Undergraduate Calendar: 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-
amisconduct.shtml 
Accessibility 
The University of Guelph is committed to creating a barrier-free environment. Providing 
services for students is a shared responsibility among students, faculty and administrators. This 
relationship is based on respect of individual rights, the dignity of the individual and the 
University community's shared commitment to an open and supportive learning environment. 
Students requiring service or accommodation, whether due to an identified, ongoing disability 
or a short-term disability should contact Student Accessibility Services as soon as possible.  
For more information, contact SAS at 519-824-4120 ext. 56208 or email sas@uoguelph.ca or 
see the website: https://wellness.uoguelph.ca/accessibility/  
Course Evaluation Information 
Please refer to the Course and Instructor Evaluation Website 
Recording of Materials  
Presentations which are made in relation to course work—including lectures—cannot be 
recorded or copied without the permission of the presenter, whether the instructor, a 
classmate or guest lecturer. Material recorded with permission is restricted to use for that 
course unless further permission is granted. 
Drop date 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
Date Submitted to Chair: 
 
 
Chair Signature (Approval): 
 
 
Sandra Scott 
Date Approved by Chair: 
 
27 August 2019 
 
 
 
The last date to drop one-semester courses, without academic penalty, is Nov 29, 2019. For 
regulations and procedures for Dropping Courses, see the Academic Calendar: 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-drop.shtml 
