1 
 
 
  
 
 
 
ACCT 4270 
Auditing II 
Fall 2019 
0.5 Credits 
  
General Course Information 
Instructor: Connie Zavitz, MEd, CPA, CA  
Email czavitz@uoguelph.ca 
Office Location  MAC 213 
Office Hours  Mondays 1:00 -2:00 pm 
Department/School Department of Management 
  
Class Schedule:  
Section 1 – Monday and Wednesday 2:30 – 3:50 pm 
Section 2 – Monday and Wednesday 8:30 – 9:50 am 
Pre-requisites: ACCT*3280 or BUS*3280 
Restrictions: none 
Course Description  
This course considers a number of advanced topics concerning both the auditor and audit 
techniques within the context of public accounting. It builds on the knowledge of the audit task 
derived in Auditing I - ACCT*3280 as well as the depth and breadth of knowledge gained in 
ACCT*3330 and ACCT*3340. 
Course Learning Outcomes    
Upon successfully completing this course, you will: 
 
Knowledge and Understanding: 
1) Assess issues related to the undertaking of an engagement or project;  
2) Assess the entity’s risk assessment processes;  
3) Assesses which set of criteria to apply to the subject matter being evaluated;  
4) Assess or determine which standards or guidelines to apply based on the nature and 
expectations of the assurance engagement or project  
5) Assess materiality for the assurance engagement or a project.  
 
2 
 
6) Assess the risks of a project, or, or audit engagements, assess the risk of material 
misstatement at the financial statement level and at the assertion level for classes of 
transactions, account balances and disclosures.  
7) Identify and evaluate the following risks: going concern, risk of material misstatement, 
fraud, and internal control deficiencies.  
8) Develops appropriate procedures based on the identified risk of material misstatement 
including test of controls, substantive testing, substantive analytical procedures, 
confirmations, opening balances, auditing estimates, related parties, use of experts, and 
use of internal audit. 
9) Evaluates audit evidence, results of analysis, and misstatements 
Discipline/Professional and Transferable Skills: 
   
10) Demonstrates a cohesive process for using professional judgment to solve problems and 
make decisions.  
11) Communicates auditing and accounting issues, analyses and recommendations 
professionally, logically, clearly and concisely. 
 
Summary of Course Content and Materials 
Course Schedule is posted on the CourseLink Site 
 
Course Assessment 
 . 
 
 
Associated 
Learning 
Outcomes 
Due Date/ 
location 
Assessment 1:  20% 
Pre-class Technical 
quizzes (Best 20 out of 
21) 
LO 1 – 7 
Before 8:00 
am on the day 
of class 
     
Assessment 2: 10% 
Professionalism and 
Engagement  
LO 10-11 
Every class 
and/or weekly 
discussion 
forums 
     
Assessment 3: 15% 
Individual (10%)/ 
Peer Marking (5%) 
LO 1-9,11/ 1-11 Weekly 
     
Assessment 4: 20% Midterm Exam LO 1-9, 11 October 16 
     
     
3 
 
     
Assessment 5: 35% Final Exam LO 1—9, 11 TBD 
     
Total  
100%  
 
 
 
Pre-Class Quizzes (max 20%) :  You are expected to have read each assigned case and the 
required readings for each session prior to coming to class. You should be prepared to discuss 
and analyse the cases assigned to each session. The pre-class quiz is based on the technical 
readings assigned and must be completed before 8am on each day of class.  The quizzes are 
posted on CourseLink.  There are 21 quizzes – the top 20 quizzes will be included in your mark.  
 
Engagement and Professionalism (max 10%) will be evaluated using the following factors:  
 
In Class Engagement Submissions:   Students will be required to form groups of 
approximately five (5) students by the second week of class. During each class, groups 
will be asked to complete discussion questions and/or other group assignments and 
present their findings to the class. Groups will also be asked to complete their findings 
on paper and INDIVIDUALLY submit their work, in the dropbox, at the end of class. 
Submitted work will be evaluated for effort only.    Each dropbox submission is worth 
½ mark.  All dropbox submissions must be completed before 5pm on the day of class.  
There will be at least 20 opportunities for dropbox submissions.  Students can receive 
a maximum of 10 marks for this activity. 
 
What have learned Discussion Forums: If a student misses class they may submit a 
reflection in the courselink discussion forum for that week.   Students may also 
respond to a discussion post posted by a peer.   Students will only be awarded for one 
mark per discussion post per week.  Students can receive a maximum of 10 marks for 
this activity.  In order to have the post factored into the participation grade, they must 
have content and be of high quality.  “I agree with you – I learned the same thing” or 
paraphrasing another peers post would not qualify as an original, high quality 
contribution.  Only one discussion post per week will be factored into the 
participation grade.  
 
Overall Professionalism:  Your individual interaction with the professor, TA, and peers 
will be evaluated (factors that the instructor will consider are: your involvement in 
your group discussions, if you act as your group spokesperson, your individual 
initiative and involvement in class discussion, professionalism in verbal and written 
communications). The professionalism demonstrated during the course can have both 
a negative or positive impact on the course.  (Learning Outcome #9, #10)  
 
Individual Case Write-up and Peer Marking:  In order to give you practice with writing cases 
before completing the midterm and final exam. There are 7 opportunities to submit peer 
marked cases.   The top 5 marks will be included as the student’s grade (bottom two grades 
will be dropped). Your grade on this activity will be based on both the quality of your write-up 
(2% per case) and the quality of feedback provided to the other student (1% per case).  
Students must complete the individual case submission in order complete the peer review.  
4 
 
Student submissions and peer reviews will be evaluated/re-graded by the professor and/or the 
TA on a sample bases.   There is zero tolerance for academic misconduct.  
 
Examinations:  Both the IN CLASS midterm and final examinations will consist of audit case 
analysis questions.  Students have the option of completing their midterm and final exam on a 
personal laptop.  If a student earns a higher grade on the final exam than the midterm, their 
final exam will be worth 45% of their total grade (instead of 35%) and their midterm will be 
worth 10% (instead of 20%).  
 
Teaching and Learning Practices   
Classes My goal for this course is to help you develop a set of knowledge and skills 
that entry-level assurance practitioners should possess. In class there will be 
strong emphasis on cases to give you practice at applying auditing theory and 
practices. 
In class, most of your time will be spent in group interaction. This enables you 
to share ideas and to improve communication skills. Through interaction, you 
will discover for yourself the meaning of concepts, the subtleties inherent in 
everyday audit situations, and the rationales for various solutions to auditing 
and accounting problems. To achieve effective interaction, I have three 
expectations: 
1. Prepare. You are expected to read assigned material in advance and to be 
fully prepared for class discussion.  
2. Attend. Because interaction is central, and because your fellow group 
members will be relying on you for ideas, I expect you to attend every 
class. Valid reasons for absence include serious illness and family 
emergencies. Studying for exams and completing assignments are not valid 
reasons to miss class. 
3. Contribute. We expect you active contribution to group case discussions.   
If you would prefer not to attend or engage in classroom activities, I 
recommend that you complete the alternate discussion posts, as 
unprofessional activities in class (i.e. arriving late, scrolling through social 
media, and not participating in class activities) will have negative impact on 
your grade. 
 
Grading 
Policies 
The time and date for assessments are indicated in this course outline. 
The procedure to submit assessments is indicated in the instructions that will 
be posted on CourseLink. Late submissions will not be accepted.  
 
Please also note that work submitted for grades may be screened 
electronically for academic misconduct, including breaches of academic 
integrity and plagiarism. In this course, your instructor will be using Turnitin, 
integrated with the CourseLink Dropbox tool, to detect possible plagiarism, 
unauthorized collaboration or copying as part of the ongoing efforts to 
maintain academic integrity at the University of Guelph. 
5 
 
 
All submitted assignments will be included as source documents in the 
Turnitin.com reference database solely for the purpose of detecting plagiarism 
of such papers. Use of the Turnitin.com service is subject to the Usage Policy 
posted on the Turnitin.com site. 
 
 
Communica
tion 
I will be communicating with you via CourseLink Home papge and/or your 
central email account <mail.uoguelph.ca> so please check both on a regular 
basis.   
 
Only questions that can be answered simply, for example by yes or no or with 
a short sentence, will be answered by email. For longer answers you will most 
likely receive an email asking you to come and see me during my office hours. 
 
Emails will usually be answered within 24 to 48 hours during weekdays. It is 
possible that some emails that are not from a university address (e.g., 
@hotmail.com) may be treated as spam and will not be answered. So please 
send all emails from your UofG email account.  
 
While I endeavour to check my email daily, students can reasonably expect a 
response from me within 48/72 hours business hours under normal 
circumstances. 
 
Please post any questions you may have on Courselink regarding your midterm 
and final exam, or come see me during office hours.  Please note, in fairness to 
other students in the class, I will not respond to midterm and final exam 
questions that are asked via email.  
Policy 
regarding 
materials 
provided by 
instructor 
and their 
designates 
 
The material shared by the course instructor or by their designate (e.g., TA) as 
part of this course, including copies of the lecture slides, toolkits, are solely for 
the personal use of the authorized student and may NOT be reproduced, or 
transmitted to others, whether it is in their original format or a modified 
version, without the express written consent of the course instructor. For 
example, students are not permitted to post course materials, rubrics, or 
assignments on sites like Course Hero.  
 
 
 
Course Resources 
Required Text: 
CPA Handbook. Electronic access to the CPA Handbook can be obtained through the 
CourseLink site or the University of Guelph library site. Because the Handbook is constantly 
being updated, a hardcopy version would quickly become out-dated and is not 
recommended. 
6 
 
McDonald, Julie (2012), Canadian Assurance Cases, John Wiley Sons Canada. 
 
Recommended Text:  
You may find it helpful when conducting case analyses to refer back to your introductory 
auditing text (or any current introductory auditing text). 
Other Resources:  
One of your primary resources will be the course website (http://courselink.uoguelph.ca). All 
announcements required and recommended readings, assignments and updates will be 
posted here. You will also be able to access any handouts you may have missed through this 
site. Check this site often. 
 
 
Course Policies 
Grading Policies 
If a student is unable to meet course requirements by the deadlines or the criteria expected 
because of medical or personal reasons, should review the regulations on academic 
consideration in the Academic Calendar and discuss their situation with the instructor, 
program counselor or other academic counselor as appropriate. 
 
http://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-grds.shtml  
 
Missed Assignments/Cases/Discussion Posts/Class Engagement: 
 
A grade of zero will be assigned if you fail to submit an assignment, unless you are ill or have 
other compassionate reasons. Please read your Undergraduate Calendar for the regulations 
regarding illness and compassionate grounds. Please note, vacation travel, moving house, or 
outside work commitments will not be accepted as valid reasons for missing deadlines. 
 
If you have religious observances which conflict with the course schedule or if you are 
registered with Student Accessibility Services, please contact the course instructor in order to 
make arrangements for your assessment if appropriate. 
 
University Policies  
Academic Consideration 
When you find yourself unable to meet an in-course requirement because of illness or 
compassionate reasons, please advise the course instructor in writing, with your name, id#, 
and e-mail contact. See the academic calendar for information on regulations and procedures 
for Academic Consideration:  
http://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-ac.shtml 
7 
 
Academic Misconduct 
The University of Guelph is committed to upholding the highest standards of academic integrity 
and it is the responsibility of all members of the University community, faculty, staff, and 
students  to be aware of what constitutes academic misconduct and to do as much as possible 
to prevent academic offences from occurring.  
University of Guelph students have the responsibility of abiding by the University's policy on 
academic misconduct regardless of their location of study; faculty, staff and students have the 
responsibility of supporting an environment that discourages misconduct. Students need to 
remain aware that instructors have access to and the right to use electronic and other means 
of detection. Please note: Whether or not a student intended to commit academic misconduct 
is not relevant for a finding of guilt. Hurried or careless submission of assignments does not 
excuse students from responsibility for verifying the academic integrity of their work before 
submitting it. Students who are in any doubt as to whether an action on their part could be 
construed as an academic offence should consult with a faculty member or faculty advisor.  
The Academic Misconduct Policy is detailed in the Undergraduate Calendar: 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-
amisconduct.shtml 
Accessibility 
The University of Guelph is committed to creating a barrier-free environment. Providing 
services for students is a shared responsibility among students, faculty and administrators. This 
relationship is based on respect of individual rights, the dignity of the individual and the 
University community's shared commitment to an open and supportive learning environment. 
Students requiring service or accommodation, whether due to an identified, ongoing disability 
or a short-term disability should contact Student Accessibility Services as soon as possible.  
For more information, contact SAS at 519-824-4120 ext. 56208 or email sas@uoguelph.ca or 
see the website: https://wellness.uoguelph.ca/accessibility/  
Course Evaluation Information 
Please refer to the Course and Instructor Evaluation Website 
Recording of Materials  
Presentations which are made in relation to course work—including lectures—cannot be 
recorded or copied without the permission of the presenter, whether the instructor, a 
classmate or guest lecturer. Material recorded with permission is restricted to use for that 
course unless further permission is granted. 
Drop date 
The last date to drop one-semester courses, without academic penalty is November 29, 
2019.  For regulations and procedures for Dropping Courses, please see the Undergraduate 
Calendar for Policies and Procedures.  
 
8 
 
 
 
 
 
Date Submitted to Chair: 
 
 
Chair Signature (Approval): 
 
 
Sandra Scott 
Date Approved by Chair: 
 
26 August 2019 
 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-drop.shtml 
 
