1 
 
 
  
 
 
 
ACCT 3350 
Taxation I 
Fall 2019 
0.5 Credits 
  
General Course Information 
Instructor: Sonia B. Dhaliwal 
Email sonia.dhaliwal@uoguelph.ca 
Office Location  Room 214, MacDonald Hall 
Office Hours  Tuesdays & Thursdays 10:30 AM – 12:30 PM 
Department/School Department of Management 
  
Class Schedule:  Mondays & Thursdays 
      Section 1: 1:00 – 2:20 PM 
      Section 2:  4:00 – 5:20 PM 
Pre-requisites: ACCT-3330 
Restrictions: 
Enrolment may be restricted to degrees or programs. See the 
department for more information. 
Course Description  
The fundamentals of the tax system as it applies to all taxpayers will be the focus of the first 
half of the course. The second half will develop forms of business organizations from a tax 
perspective. Basic tax planning techniques which attempt to maximize the cash flows and 
returns on investments will then be studied. The emphasis in the course is on business decision 
making. A review of personal financial planning and investment decisions will also be included. 
Course Learning Outcomes    
Upon successfully completing this course, you will be able to: 
 
Knowledge and Understanding: 
1) Describe the personal Canadian income tax and GST/HST systems and processes as a whole.  
2) Determine compliance requirements, including filing deadlines, assessment, penalties 
and appeals as they relate to individuals. 
3) Calculate income, taxable income and taxes payable, including tax payments, for 
transactions encountered in routine situations for individuals and corporations. 
 
2 
 
4) Identify and assess tax planning opportunities for individuals  
5) Assess general tax issues for an individual 
6) Assess residency of a taxpayer in various situations 
 
 
Summary of Course Content and Materials 
See weekly schedule posted in CourseLink for weekly content details. 
Course Assessment 
 . 
 
 
Associated 
Learning 
Outcomes 
Due Date/ 
location 
Assessment 1:  10% Online Quizzes LO 1 – 5 
See weekly 
schedule 
     
Assessment 2: 30% Midterm Exam LO 2, 4, 5 October 9 
     
Assessment 3: 10% Assignment 1 LO 1, 3, 4, 5 October 11 
     
Assessment 4: 10% Assignment 2 LO 2, 4, 5 November 27 
     
Assessment 5: 40% Final Exam LO 2 – 6 December 2 
     
Total  
100%  
 
 
 
Teaching and Learning Practices   
Class 
Preparation 
Each week, you are expected to complete the self-assessment quiz on the Wolters 
Kluwers website. These quizzes must be completed by the date denoted on the 
weekly schedule, or it will be considered incomplete. The study guide is valuable in 
assisting your preparation and success in the course. 
 
Team 
Assignments 
You are free to select your Teams of up to four or five students to complete these 
assignments. Once you pick your group, you will remain in the same team for both 
assignments.  Before you can begin the assignment, each group must register their 
group members on CourseLink under “Groups”. Only one member is to submit the 
assignment on the group’s behalf.  
 
Examinations 
Both examinations are closed-Textbook exam.  However, you will be permitted use 
of the Income Tax Act – either in electronic format (you will need to bring your own 
laptop) or in hard copy format (those can be provided if the instructor is notified 
3 
 
ahead of time). Other electronic devices are not permitted, except calculators. No 
Telephones may be used in exams.  
 
Course Resources 
This course uses a variety of materials and resources. One of your primary resources will be the 
course website (http://courselink.uoguelph.ca). All announcements, required and recommended 
readings, assignments and updates will be posted here. You will also be able to access any handouts 
you may have missed through this site. Check this site often. 
Required Text: 
Introduction to Federal Income Taxation in Canada 40th Edition with Student Study Guide (2019-2020), 
Beam, Laiken, Barnett, Johnstone, Mescall, and Robson; Wolters Kluwer. 
IntelliConnect – This online resource includes the Income Tax Act, tax court cases, CRA administrative 
documents, and more in a fully searchable interactive format. Access to IntelliConnect is provided 
with the required textbook and will be used throughout the course during class for reference, and 
assignments. 
A copy of the textbook will be placed on library reserve. The call number will be available on 
CourseLink under “Resources”. 
Other Resources:  
Income Tax Act (Canada) – Electronic access to the Income Tax Act can also be obtained through the 
University of Guelph’s library site. 
 
In this course, we will be using Turnitin, integrated with the CourseLink Dropbox tool, to  detect 
possible plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, or copying as part of the ongoing efforts to maintain 
academic integrity at the University of Guelph. All submitted assignments will be included as source 
documents in the Turnitin.com reference database solely for the purpose of detecting plagiarism of 
such papers. Use of the Turnitin.com service is subject to the Usage Policy posted on the Turnitin.com 
site.  
A major benefit of using Turnitin is that you will be able to educate and empower yourselves in 
preventing academic misconduct. In this course, you may screen your own assignments through 
Turnitin as many times as you wish before the due date. You will be able to see and print reports that 
show you exactly where you have properly and improperly referenced the outside sources and 
materials in your assignment. 
 
 
Course Policies 
Grading Policies 
Unless you have discussed an extension well ahead of the due date with the instructor, late 
penalties of 5% of the total grade earned per day (including weekends) will be assigned to any 
4 
 
assessment (i.e. deducted from the total mark). Extensions will only be granted on the basis of 
valid medical or personal reasons, and need to be requested via email to the instructor as soon 
as possible. Late assignments will not be accepted once graded assignments have been 
returned officially to the class at large, unless circumstances permit and alternative 
arrangements have been made. 
 
Students who find themselves unable to meet course requirements by the deadlines or the 
criteria expected because of medical or personal reasons, should review the regulations on 
academic consideration in the Academic Calendar and discuss their situation with the 
instructor, program counselor or other academic counselor as appropriate. 
 
http://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-grds.shtml  
 
Missed Assignments: 
 
A grade of zero will be assigned if you fail to submit an assignment, unless you are ill or have 
other compassionate reasons. Please read your Undergraduate Calendar for the regulations 
regarding illness and compassionate grounds. Please note, vacation travel, moving house, or 
outside work commitments will not be accepted as valid reasons for missing deadlines. 
 
If you have religious observances which conflict with the course schedule or if you are 
registered with Student Accessibility Services, please contact the course instructor in order to 
make arrangements for your assessment if appropriate. 
 
 
University Policies  
Academic Consideration 
When you find yourself unable to meet an in-course requirement because of illness or 
compassionate reasons, please advise the course instructor in writing, with your name, id#, 
and e-mail contact. See the academic calendar for information on regulations and procedures 
for Academic Consideration: 
http://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-ac.shtml 
Academic Misconduct 
The University of Guelph is committed to upholding the highest standards of academic integrity 
and it is the responsibility of all members of the University community, faculty, staff, and 
students  to be aware of what constitutes academic misconduct and to do as much as possible 
to prevent academic offences from occurring.  
University of Guelph students have the responsibility of abiding by the University's policy on 
academic misconduct regardless of their location of study; faculty, staff and students have the 
responsibility of supporting an environment that discourages misconduct. Students need to 
remain aware that instructors have access to and the right to use electronic and other means 
of detection. Please note: Whether or not a student intended to commit academic misconduct 
is not relevant for a finding of guilt. Hurried or careless submission of assignments does not 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
Date Submitted to Chair: 
 
 
Chair Signature (Approval): 
 
 
Sandra Scott 
Date Approved by Chair: 
 
28 August 2019 
 
 
excuse students from responsibility for verifying the academic integrity of their work before 
submitting it. Students who are in any doubt as to whether an action on their part could be 
construed as an academic offence should consult with a faculty member or faculty advisor.  
The Academic Misconduct Policy is detailed in the Undergraduate Calendar: 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-
amisconduct.shtml 
Accessibility 
The University of Guelph is committed to creating a barrier-free environment. Providing 
services for students is a shared responsibility among students, faculty and administrators. This 
relationship is based on respect of individual rights, the dignity of the individual and the 
University community's shared commitment to an open and supportive learning environment. 
Students requiring service or accommodation, whether due to an identified, ongoing disability 
or a short-term disability should contact Student Accessibility Services as soon as possible.  
For more information, contact SAS at 519-824-4120 ext. 56208 or email sas@uoguelph.ca or 
see the website: https://wellness.uoguelph.ca/accessibility/  
Course Evaluation Information 
Please refer to the Course and Instructor Evaluation Website 
Recording of Materials  
Presentations which are made in relation to course work—including lectures—cannot be 
recorded or copied without the permission of the presenter, whether the instructor, a 
classmate or guest lecturer. Material recorded with permission is restricted to use for that 
course unless further permission is granted. 
Drop date 
The last date to drop one-semester courses, without academic penalty, is XXXXX, 20XX. For 
regulations and procedures for Dropping Courses, see the Academic Calendar: 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-drop.shtml 
