1 
 
 
  
 
 
 
ACCT 4230 
                          Advanced Management Accounting 
Fall 2019 
0.5 Credits 
  
General Course Information 
Instructor: Kalinga Jagoda Ph.D, CPA, CMA, ACMA, CGMA 
Email kjagoda@uoguelph.ca 
Office Location  Room 206 Macdonald Hall 
Office Hours  Mon. and Wed. 11:30 AM -1:00 PM 
Department/School Department of Management 
  
Class Schedule:  Section 01 – Monday/Wednesdays 1:00 –2:20 pm,  MCKN, Room 121 
Pre-requisites: ACCT*3230 Or BUS 3230 
Restrictions: 
Enrolment may be restricted to degrees or programs. See the 
department for more information. 
Course Description  
This course provides advanced coverage of management accounting concepts and the 
application of management accounting information for managerial decision-making. 
This course extends the concepts covered in intermediate management accounting and 
integrates pertinent situational problems from other functional areas of enterprises such as 
global trade and process controls. 
Course Learning Outcomes    
Upon successfully completing this course, you will: 
1. Evaluates management information requirements 
2. Evaluates the types of information systems used and the role they play in the 
organization 
3. Develops or evaluates information inputs for operational plans, budgets and forecasts 
4. Prepare, analyze, evaluate budgets, and implications of variances 
5. Evaluate cost classifications and costing methods for management of ongoing 
operations 
6. Perform sensitivity analysis and evaluate sustainable profit maximization and capacity 
management performance using accepted frameworks.   
7. Demonstrate the ability to integrate facts and knowledge, exhibit critical thinking, 
decision making, and creative thinking skills in the application of theories, systems 
and tools in generating effective alternatives.   
 
2 
 
8. Summarize the strengths and limitations of data or information provided by 
accounting systems in order to be in a position to make informed risk adjusted 
strategic and operating decisions. 
9. Interprets imperfect accounting information in terms of both short term and long 
term business strategy. 
10. Demonstrate professional level written communication skills to convey analysis and 
recommendations to business cases and situations studied 
 
Summary of Course Content and Materials 
 
Date Lecture Topic/Activity Readings 
Sep. 9 & 11 
Introduction, Role of Managerial Accounting (MA) 
Introduction to Case Analysis 
Atkinson Chapter 1 
Sep. 16 & 18 Balanced Scorecard and Strategy Map Atkinson Chapter 2 
Sep.  23 & 25 Cost Allocation  Atkinson Chapter 4 
Sep. 25 
Simulation Report Due  
Printed Copy: In class 
 
Sep. 30 & 
Oct.2   
Activity-based Cost systems Atkinson Chapter 5  
Oct. 7 & 9 Measuring and Managing Customer Relationships Atkinson Chapter 6 
Oct. 16 & 21  Corporate Governance  
Lecture Slides, 
Readings and 
Articles 
Oct. 23 
Mid-Semester Examination  
In Class 
 
Oct. 28 & 30 Measuring and Managing Process Performance Atkinson Chapter 7 
Nov. 4 & 6 Capital Budgeting  Horngren Ch. 20 
Nov. 11 &13 Financial Control 
Atkinson Chapter 
11 
Nov. 18 & 20 Using Budgets for Planning and Coordination 
Atkinson Chapter 
10 
Nov. 20 Group Case Study Due  
Printed Copy: In class 
3 
 
Nov. 25 & 27 Life Cycle Costing Atkinson Chapter 8 
Nov. 27 & 29 Management Control Systems  Atkinson Chapter 9 
Nov.29 Final Exam Review 
 
 
Course Assessment 
 . 
 
 
Associated 
Learning 
Outcomes 
Due Date/ 
location 
Assessment 1:  15 % Case Study  LO 1 - 10 
Nov 20/in 
class (printed) 
     
Assessment 2: 5% In-Class Activities  LO 1 – 8 
Refer to 
weekly 
schedule/In 
class 
     
Assessment 3: 25% Midterm exam LO 1 – 9 
Oct 23/In 
class 
     
Assessment 4: 20% Simulation  LO 1 – 10 Sept 25/ In 
class (printed) 
     
Assessment 5: 35% Final exam LO 1-9 Dec 13/TBA 
Total  
100    
 
Teaching and Learning Practices   
Lectures 
Lectures will be a combination of presenting new material, feedback on assigned 
problems, and some in class group work on short cases that will then be moderated 
with possible solutions.   
Course Resources 
Required Text: 
1) Management Accounting: Information for Decision-Making and Strategy Execution, with 
MyAccountingLab and eText -- Access Card Package, 6/e, Atkinson, Kaplan, Matsumura & 
Young, Pearson  Prentice Hall, ISBN-10: 0132965445 | ISBN-13: 9780132965446 
  
2) Course Pack: Available at the Co-op Bookstore, Johnston Hall 
 
4 
 
3) Simulation Package : Please refer to the Courselink site 
Recommended Text:  
Cost Accounting, Seventh Canadian Edition by Horngren/ Datar/ Rajan/ Beaubien/ Graham, Pearson, 
Canada  (most students will have this text from previous management accounting courses – copies 
will be on reserve at the McLaughlin Library).  Most students will already have this text from prior 
courses. 
Course Policies 
Grading Policies 
Unless you have discussed an extension well ahead of the due date with the instructor, late 
penalties of 5% of the total grade earned per day (including weekends) will be assigned to 
any assessment (i.e. deducted from the total mark). Extensions will only be granted on the 
basis of valid medical or personal reasons, and need to be requested via email to the 
instructor as soon as possible. Late assignments will not be accepted once graded 
assignments have been returned officially to the class at large, unless circumstances permit 
and alternative arrangements have been made. 
 
Students who find themselves unable to meet course requirements by the deadlines or the 
criteria expected because of medical or personal reasons, should review the regulations on 
academic consideration in the Academic Calendar and discuss their situation with the 
instructor, program counselor or other academic counselor as appropriate. 
 
http://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-grds.shtml  
 
Missed Assignments: 
 
A grade of zero will be assigned if you fail to submit an assignment, unless you are ill or have 
other compassionate reasons. Please read your Undergraduate Calendar for the regulations 
regarding illness and compassionate grounds. Please note, vacation travel, moving house, or 
outside work commitments will not be accepted as valid reasons for missing deadlines. 
 
If you have religious observances which conflict with the course schedule or if you are 
registered with Student Accessibility Services, please contact the course instructor in order to 
make arrangements for your assessment if appropriate. 
 
 
University Policies  
Academic Consideration 
When you find yourself unable to meet an in-course requirement because of illness or 
compassionate reasons, please advise the course instructor in writing, with your name, id#, 
and e-mail contact. See the academic calendar for information on regulations and procedures 
for Academic Consideration: 
http://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-ac.shtml 
5 
 
Academic Misconduct 
The University of Guelph is committed to upholding the highest standards of academic 
integrity and it is the responsibility of all members of the University community, faculty, staff, 
and students  to be aware of what constitutes academic misconduct and to do as much as 
possible to prevent academic offences from occurring.  
University of Guelph students have the responsibility of abiding by the University's policy on 
academic misconduct regardless of their location of study; faculty, staff and students have 
the responsibility of supporting an environment that discourages misconduct. Students need 
to remain aware that instructors have access to and the right to use electronic and other 
means of detection. Please note: Whether or not a student intended to commit academic 
misconduct is not relevant for a finding of guilt. Hurried or careless submission of 
assignments does not excuse students from responsibility for verifying the academic integrity 
of their work before submitting it. Students who are in any doubt as to whether an action on 
their part could be construed as an academic offence should consult with a faculty member 
or faculty advisor.  
The Academic Misconduct Policy is detailed in the Undergraduate Calendar: 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-
amisconduct.shtml 
Accessibility 
The University of Guelph is committed to creating a barrier-free environment. Providing 
services for students is a shared responsibility among students, faculty and administrators. 
This relationship is based on respect of individual rights, the dignity of the individual and the 
University community's shared commitment to an open and supportive learning 
environment. Students requiring service or accommodation, whether due to an identified, 
ongoing disability or a short-term disability should contact Student Accessibility Services as 
soon as possible.  
For more information, contact SAS at 519-824-4120 ext. 56208 or email sas@uoguelph.ca or 
see the website: https://wellness.uoguelph.ca/accessibility/  
Course Evaluation Information 
Please refer to the Course and Instructor Evaluation Website 
Recording of Materials  
Presentations which are made in relation to course work—including lectures—cannot be 
recorded or copied without the permission of the presenter, whether the instructor, a 
classmate or guest lecturer. Material recorded with permission is restricted to use for that 
course unless further permission is granted. 
Drop date 
The last date to drop one-semester courses, without academic penalty, is November 29, 
2019. For regulations and procedures for Dropping Courses, see the Academic Calendar: 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
Date Submitted to Chair: 
 
 
Chair Signature (Approval): 
 
 
Sandra Scott 
Date Approved by Chair: 
 
27 August 2019 
 
 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-drop.shtml 
