CIS*3090 – Parallel Programming [0.5 credits]
Course Outline – Fall 2019
Instructor: David Calvert
Office : Reynolds Building, Room 2201
Phone: 824-4120 ext. 53085
Email: dcalvert@uoguelph.ca
Timetable
Lecture: Tuesday, Thursday, 10:00-11:20, Crop Science 116
Textbook: An Introduction to Parallel Programming, by Peter Pacheco, Morgan Kaufmann, 2011.
ISBN-10: 0123742609
ISBN-13: 978-0123742605
Course Web Page: All course material will be posted to Courselink.
https://courselink.uoguelph.ca
Marking Scheme
Programming
• Assignments: 50%
Written
• Midterm Exam: 25%
• Final Exam: 25%
Notes:
• You must achieve a passing grade in each of the Written and Programming sections to pass
the course. A failing total in either of the above two sections will result in a final grade in the
course equal to that failing total. The highest grade you can achieve if you fail either section
is 45%.
• Assignments will primarily involve parallel programming using different software libraries.
• There is no group work in this course. Any work which is the product of more than one
person’s efforts is grounds for academic misconduct. All submitted code will be checked
for copying. All parties involved will be reported to the Director of SOCS as participants
in academic misconduct. See Academic Misconduct in Section VIII of the Undergraduate
Calendar. The penalties for academic misconduct are described in the University of Guelph
Undergraduate Calendar.
• Code which is submitted and does not compile or execute will be given a mark of zero.
• Failure to submit assignments correctly will result in a substantial loss of marks.
• Remarking of assignments will occur in the advising times for the teaching assistant. Requests
for remarking will be considered for only one week after the assignment has been returned.
• Assignments may be handed in up to two days after the due date listed on the assignment
with no penalty. No other extensions will be granted.
• Classes missed due to holidays are made up in the last week of the semester.
Lecture Topics
1. Multi-core and cluster platforms.
2. Parallel patterns.
3. Software libraries for parallel programming.
4. Data and task parallel approaches.
Semester Schedule
• Assignment 1 due Friday, Sept. 27
• Midterm – Tuesday, Oct. 8 in class
• Assignment 2 due Friday, Oct. 25
• Assignment 3 due Friday, Nov. 8
• Assignment 4 due Friday, Nov. 22
Calendar Description
This course examines the current techniques for design and development of parallel programs tar-
geted for platforms ranging from multicore computers to high-performance clusters, with and with-
out shared memory. It includes theoretical models for, and hardware effects on, parallel computa-
tion, the definitions of speedup, scalability, and data versus task-parallel approaches. The course
will also examine strategies for achieving speedup based on controlling granularity, resource con-
tention, idle time, threading overhead, work allocation, and data localization.
Prerequisite(s): (CIS*2030 or ENGG*3640), CIS*3110
E-mail Communication
As per university regulations, all students are required to check their ¡mail.uoguelph.ca¿ e-mail
account regularly: e-mail is the official route of communication between the University and its
students.
When You Cannot Meet a Course Requirement
When you find yourself unable to meet an in-course requirement because of illness or compassionate
reasons, please advise the course instructor (or designated person, such as a teaching assistant) in
writing, with your name, id number, and e-mail contact. See the undergraduate calendar for
information on regulations and procedures for Academic Consideration.
Drop Date
Students will have until the last day of classes to drop courses without academic penalty. The regu-
lations and procedures for course registration are available in their respective Academic Calendars.
Copies of out-of-class assignments
Keep paper and/or other reliable back-up copies of all out-of-class assignments: you may be asked
to resubmit work at any time.
Accessibility
The University promotes the full participation of students who experience disabilities in their aca-
demic programs. To that end, the provision of academic accommodation is a shared responsibility
between the University and the student.
When accommodations are needed, the student is required to first register with Student Ac-
cessibility Services (SAS). Documentation to substantiate the existence of a disability is required,
however, interim accommodations may be possible while that process is underway.
Accommodations are available for both permanent and temporary disabilities. It should be
noted that common illnesses such as a cold or the flu do not constitute a disability.
Use of the SAS Exam Centre requires students to book their exams at least 7 days in advance,
and not later than the 40th Class Day. More information: www.uoguelph.ca/sas
Academic Misconduct
The University of Guelph is committed to upholding the highest standards of academic integrity
and it is the responsibility of all members of the University community faculty, staff, and students
to be aware of what constitutes academic misconduct and to do as much as possible to prevent
academic offences from occurring. University of Guelph students have the responsibility of abiding
by the University’s policy on academic misconduct regardless of their location of study; faculty, staff
and students have the responsibility of supporting an environment that discourages misconduct.
Students need to remain aware that instructors have access to and the right to use electronic and
other means of detection.
Please note: Whether or not a student intended to commit academic misconduct is not relevant
for a finding of guilt. Hurried or careless submission of assignments does not excuse students from
responsibility for verifying the academic integrity of their work before submitting it.
Students who are in any doubt as to whether an action on their part could be construed as an
academic offence should consult with a faculty member or faculty advisor.
The Academic Misconduct Policy is detailed in the Undergraduate Calendar.
Recording of Materials
Presentations which are made in relation to course workincluding lectures cannot be recorded or
copied without the permission of the presenter, whether the instructor, a classmate or guest lecturer.
Material recorded with permission is restricted to use for that course unless further permission is
granted.
Resources
The Academic Calendars are the source of information about the University of Guelphs procedures,
policies and regulations which apply to undergraduate, graduate and diploma programs.
