CIS*4030 Mobile Computing 
0.50 Credits – Undergraduate – Winter 2020 
School of Computer Science – University of Guelph
Lectures: 
Tuesdays & Thursdays, 1430-1550 
Crop Science 117 
Instructor Details: 
David Flatla (dflatla@uoguelph.ca) 
Office: Reynolds 2205 
Office Hours: by appointment 
Teaching Assistant Details: 
Patrick Houlding (cis4030@socs.uoguelph.ca) 
Arslan Kazmi (cis4030@socs.uoguelph.ca)
Course Website: 
https://courselink.uoguelph.ca/d2l/home/611872 
The course website will be used to post any materials, announcements, and assignment 
specifications and grades. You are responsible for checking this site regularly. Assignments 
will be submitted via the course website. 
Textbook: 
https://commonsware.com/Android/ (latest version is 8.13 [August 2018]) 
https://commonsware.com/Android/4-2-free (latest free version is 7.0 [December 2015]) 
Course Prerequisites: CIS*2030, CIS*2750, CIS*3110 
Course Description: This course introduces students to mobile computing and mobile 
application development. It examines mobile technology, application development, user 
interaction, data storage, and software tools. 
Course Objectives: The purpose of this course is to help you become familiar with the 
technical skills and experience necessary to be competitive for an entry-level Android 
Developer job. As such, you will become a subject-matter expert in (at least) one Android 
topic, as well as gain a robust topical knowledge of the breadth of Android development. You 
will demonstrate your expertise by: 1) helping guide your peers to understand your particular 
specialism, and 2) completing 20 short exercises covering the breadth of Android 
development. To further extend and demonstrate your expertise, you will also complete a 
substantial Android development project (in groups), with the specific goal of releasing a 
stable minimal viable product (MVP) on the Google Play Store by the end of the course. 
Grading Scheme: 
Peer Teaching Activity = 40% 
20 Android Exercises @ 1% each = 20% total 
Android Group Project = 40% 
Your final grade will be the weighted average of your grades for each of the above 
components. 
Assessment: 
Peer Teaching Activities will be completed in class between 14 January and 13 February 
(inclusive – 10 classes). For your activity, you will have ~40 minutes to teach and 
demonstrate your particular topic (2 per class). You will also set an exercise for your peers 
(the Android Exercise for your topic), which will be released by the instructional staff via the 
course webpage. Activities will be done in groups of 3-4 (70 students / (10 classes x 2 
activities per class) = 3.5 students per activity). 
Android Exercises will be released on the course website as I receive them. I recommend that 
you work on these as they come out. They must all be completed by 28 February. You will 
complete these Exercises individually. 
 
 
Android Group Project will have three milestones: 
Milestone 1 (10% - presentation of your idea) will be due in-class 27 February 
Milestone 2 (10% - initial design and coding) will be due in-class 12 March 
Milestone 3 (20% - public demo of MVP) will be due in-class 02 April 
I will release the group project specification before the end of January. You will do the project 
in groups of ~5 (14 groups). You don’t have to work with the same people as for the Peer 
Teaching Activity. 
Course Schedule: 
Week (Mon) Tuesday Class Thursday Class 
00 (06 Jan) Course introduction Topic generation & selection 
01 (13 Jan) 2 Peer Teaching Activities 2 Peer Teaching Activities 
02 (20 Jan) 2 Peer Teaching Activities 2 Peer Teaching Activities 
03 (27 Jan) 2 Peer Teaching Activities 2 Peer Teaching Activities 
04 (03 Feb) 2 Peer Teaching Activities 2 Peer Teaching Activities 
05 (10 Feb) 2 Peer Teaching Activities 2 Peer Teaching Activities 
06 (17 Feb) Winter Break Winter Break 
07 (24 Feb) -- Milestone 1 
08 (02 Mar) -- -- 
09 (09 Mar) -- Milestone 2 
10 (16 Mar) -- -- 
11 (23 Mar) -- -- 
12 (30 Mar) -- Milestone 3 
Additional Notes: 
• First day of class is Tuesday, 07 January. 
• Peer Teaching Activities will take place from 14 January – 13 February (inclusive). 
• Winter Break (no lectures or labs) is 17 February – 21 February. 
• After Winter Break, we will only meet together formally on 27 February (Project 
Milestone 1), 12 March (Project Milestone 2), and 02 April (Project Milestone 3). Please 
use the class time to work on your projects. 
• The final day of classes is 03 April. 
• There is no midterm exam for this course. 
• There is no final exam for this course. 
E-mail Communication: 
As per university regulations, all students are required to check their @uoguelph.ca e-mail 
account regularly: e-mail is the official route of communication between the University and its 
students. 
You must use the course email (under TA information above) for all course-related 
correspondence. We all get a lot of email, so please state the course title and your name in any 
correspondence you send. If you send a question that is answerable via Google, the course text 
book, your peers, or any other resource besides us, then we will redirect you instead of 
answering your question (and that wastes both of our time). Please be respectful in all email 
correspondence. We promise to do the same. 
When You Cannot Meet a Course Requirement: 
When you find yourself unable to meet an in-course requirement because of illness or 
compassionate reasons, please advise the course instructor in writing, with your name, id#, 
and e-mail contact. See the undergraduate calendar for information on regulations and 
procedures for Academic Consideration. 
 
Drop Date 
Courses that are one semester long must be dropped by the last day of classes. The 
regulations and procedures for Dropping Courses are available in the Undergraduate 
Calendar. 
 
Copies of out-of-class assignments 
Keep reliable back-up copies of any work that you do in the course; you may be asked to 
resubmit your work at any time. 
 
Accessibility: 
The University promotes the full participation of students who experience disabilities in their 
academic programs. To that end, the provision of academic accommodation is a shared 
responsibility between the University and the student. 
 
When accommodations are needed, the student is required to first register with Student 
Accessibility Services (SAS). Documentation to substantiate the existence of a disability is 
required, however, interim accommodations may be possible while that process is underway. 
Accommodations are available for both permanent and temporary disabilities. It should be 
noted that common illnesses such as a cold or the flu do not constitute a disability.  
 
More information: http://www.uoguelph.ca/sas 
 
Academic Misconduct: 
The University of Guelph is committed to upholding the highest standards of academic 
integrity and it is the responsibility of all members of the University community – faculty, 
staff, and students – to be aware of what constitutes academic misconduct and to do as much 
as possible to prevent academic offences from occurring. University of Guelph students have 
the responsibility of abiding by the University's policy on academic misconduct regardless of 
their location of study; faculty, staff and students have the responsibility of supporting an 
environment that discourages misconduct. Students need to remain aware that instructors 
have access to and the right to use electronic and other means of detection. 
 
Please note: Whether or not a student intended to commit academic misconduct is not 
relevant for a finding of guilt. Hurried or careless submission of assignments does not excuse 
students from responsibility for verifying the academic integrity of their work before 
submitting it. Students who are in any doubt as to whether an action on their part could be 
construed as an academic offence should consult with a faculty member or faculty advisor. 
 
The Academic Misconduct Policy is detailed in the Undergraduate Calendar. 
 
Recording of Materials: 
Presentations that are made in relation to course work—including lectures—cannot be 
recorded or copied without the permission of the presenter, whether the instructor, a 
classmate, or guest lecturer. Material recorded with permission is restricted to use for that 
course unless further permission is granted. 
 
Academic Calendar: The Academic Calendars are the source of information about the 
University of Guelph’s procedures, policies and regulations that apply to undergraduate, 
graduate, and diploma programs: 
http://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/index.cfm?index 
 
