1 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   HROB 2010 
        Foundations of Leadership 
 Fall 2019 
  0.5 Credits 
  
General Course Information 
Instructor: Thomas Sasso, MA, PhD Candidate 
Email tsasso@uoguelph.ca  
Office Location  Macdonald Hall 217 
Office Hours  Tuesdays 10:00am – 11:30am  
Department/School Management 
  
Class Schedule:  Tuesdays and Thursdays 8:30am – 9:50am  
RICH 2529 
Pre-requisites:  
Restrictions: UNIV 2000 
Course Description  
Using an integrated approach to studying leadership, this foundation course covers history, 
evolving theories, models, and research both from a theoretical point of view and practical 
application. This course will use a seminar style with applied workshops, class discussions, 
guest speakers, and student participation. Students will prepare elements of a skills portfolio 
and a research paper. This is a required course for the Certificate in Leadership. 
Leadership is key to the future of individuals, organizations, communities, and nations. Many 
organizations in the public, private, and not-for-profit sectors are moving away from traditional 
management functions toward models of people/participant/employee empowerment based 
on various leadership models. HROB*2010: Foundations of Leadership is intended to support 
you in further understanding and preparing for leadership roles, situations, experiences, 
and/or research. Using an integrated approach to studying leadership, this foundation course 
explores leadership theories, the application to leadership and current issues, as well as critical 
and self-reflection on one’s own leadership qualities. The course utilizes a wide range of 
learning methodologies to provide an opportunity for students to further enhance and apply 
their knowledge of leadership, while practicing the skills necessary for effective leadership 
engaging in the subject of leadership with others. 
Course Learning Outcomes    
Upon successfully completing this course, you will: 
 
Knowledge and Understanding: 
1. Demonstrate an understanding of current and historical leadership theories and 
concepts (content quizzes, final exam).  
 
2 
 
 
Discipline/Professional and Transferable Skills: 
2. Apply leadership theories and concepts to real-life and simulated situations and/or 
persons (in class exercises, final exam, group presentation). 
 
Attitudes and Values 
3. Analyze and critically reflect on your own leadership experiences and expectations 
(personal leadership portfolio) 
4. Critically reflect upon and assess your leadership development to date, enabling you 
to discover opportunities for future development (personal leadership portfolio) 
 
Summary of Course Content and Materials 
Leadership means many things to many people. While everyone seems to have their own 
view of what leadership is and why it is important, ideas about leadership have been the 
subject of great debate by philosophers throughout the ages and, more recently, the focus of 
inquiry by scholars in the management and organization literature. This course, however, 
isn’t only about managerial leadership – it’s about leadership in all aspects of life.  While we 
use much literature from the management field, we apply these ideas to a variety of settings 
and people.  My goal is that you will find here ideas and tools that will help you understand, 
reflect on and develop your own leadership. 
 
Course Schedule and Key Dates: The following schedule is subject to modification by the 
professor with notice in the previous class. If you miss a class, please make sure that you 
contact me or a fellow student to stay up to date with any potential changes. 
 
Date Lecture Topic/ Assessment Readings  
Sept 5 1 Course Overview/ Assignment 
Explanations 
Course Syllabus 
Northouse, Chapter 1 
Sept 10 2 Power and Trait Approach Northouse, Chapter 2 
Sept 12 3 Skills Approach Northouse, Chapter 3 
Sept 17 4 Behavioural Theories of 
Leadership 
Northouse, Chapter 4 
Sept 19 5 Situational Theories of Leadership Northouse, Chapter 5 
Sept 24 6 Workshop on Personal Leadership 
Portfolio 
 
Sept 26 7 Path-Goal Theory Northouse, Chapter 6 
Oct 1 8 Followers Northouse, Chapter 12 
Oct 3 9 Transactional vs. Transformational 
Leadership 
Northouse, Chapter 8 
Oct 8 10 Team Leadership Northouse, Chapter 14 
Oct 10 11 Workshop on Group Presentation  
Oct 15 12 Thanksgiving Break – No Class   
3 
 
Oct 17 13 Authentic Leadership Northouse, Chapter 9 
Oct 22 14 Servant Leadership Northouse, Chapter 10 
Oct 24 15 Leadership Ethics Northouse, Chapter 13 
Oct 29 16 Gender and Leadership Northouse, Chapter 15 
Oct 31 17 Culture and Leadership Northouse, Chapter 16 
Nov 5 18 Group Presentations: 
Team 1 
Team 2 
Team 3 
 
Nov 7 19 Group Presentations: 
Team 4 
Team 5 
Team 6 
 
Nov 12 20 Group Presentations: 
Team 7 
Team 8 
Team 9 
 
Nov 14 21 Group Presentations: 
Team 10 
Team 11 
Team 12 
 
Nov 19 22 Group Presentations: 
Team 13 
Team 14 
Team 15 
  
Nov 21 23 Group Presentations: 
Team 16 
Team 17 
Team 18 
 
Nov 26 24 Group Presentations: 
Team 19 
Team 20 
Team 21 
 
Nov 28 25 Course wrap-up and final exam 
review 
 
 
Instructor lectures will be coordinated with the readings. To genuinely benefit from this 
course, you need to do the readings prior to attending lectures. Otherwise your experience 
will be mixed. Additionally, students should consider reviewing content from the readings 
after lectures to note content that has received additional attention and expansion during 
the lecture. Due to the extensive content in the textbook, and within the literature, my goal is 
to review some of the more complex concepts and bridge them with applied purpose. 
 
4 
 
Not all assigned material will be covered in class. Students are nonetheless expected to 
understand all of the assigned materials and come to class prepared to ask questions about 
anything they do not understand fully. Please note that casually reading the textbook will not 
be sufficient for you to earn a good grade. You should plan to go through the relevant 
chapters in your textbook several times for a deep understanding and integration of the 
content. 
 
Students may benefit from self-designed study groups or other learning structures to support 
their understanding of lecture content and assigned readings. 
  
Course Assessment 
 . 
 
 Associated 
Learning 
Outcomes 
Due Date/ 
location 
Assessment 1:  10% Content quizzes LO 1, 2  As detailed in 
schedule 
     
Assessment 2: 15% Weekly Discussion and 
Activities 
LO 2 Weekly 
     
Assessment 3: 25% Personal Leadership 
Portfolio 
LO 3, 4 Nov 18th by 
11:59pm on 
Courselink 
     
Assessment 4: 20% Group Assignment LO 2 As detailed in 
schedule 
     
Assessment 5: 30% Final Exam LO 1,2 TBD 
     
Total  100%    
 
 
Online Content Quizzes 
Content quizzes are short multiple-choice quizzes intended to evaluate your knowledge of 
the terms, vocabulary, and concepts that are part of the field of leadership studies. Each quiz 
is completed online the night before the topic is addressed in class, as detailed in the 
schedule. Quizzes close at 11:59pm on the night before class. There are 10 quizzes that 
contribute towards your grade (thus each one is 1% of your final grade). 
Quiz 1 (Traits) – Due September 9th at 11:59pm on CourseLink. 
Quiz 2 (Skills) – Due September 11th at 11:59pm on CourseLink. 
Quiz 3 (Behavioural) – Due September 16th at 11:59pm on CourseLink. 
Quiz 4 (Situational) – Due September 19th at 11:59pm on CourseLink. 
Quiz 5 (Path-Goal) – Due September 25th at 11:59pm on CourseLink. 
Quiz 6 (Transformational) – Due October 2nd at 11:59pm on CourseLink. 
Quiz 7 (Team) – Due October 7th at 11:59pm on CourseLink. 
5 
 
Quiz 8 (Servant) – Due October 21st at 11:59pm on CourseLink. 
Quiz 9 (Ethics) – Due October 23rd at 11:59pm on CourseLink. 
Quiz 10 (Gender) – Due October 28th at 11:59pm on CourseLink. 
Weekly Discussions and Activities 
Participation in class consists primarily of taking an active part in class discussions, individual 
and group exercises, individual and group discussion questions, and presentations. In-class 
contribution is considered to be an integral component of this course. Every student brings a 
different combination of expertise and experience to bear on each discussion, so students are 
expected not only to learn from the experience of taking the course, but to contribute to the 
learning experience of others in the class as well. Through such contribution, their own 
learning is enhanced. Throughout the course, students will be asked to participate not only in 
class discussions, but also in in-class individual and group exercises, discussion questions, etc. 
Thus, whenever we have in-class exercises and discussions, I will ask team members to hand 
in a summary sheet at the end of that class (or submit to dropbox on CourseLink) indicating 
the names of participating team members and a brief, one paragraph summary of the team’s 
learning for that class. Other participation activities, both individual and group-based, will be 
announced in class. You are also expected to participate in all group presentations by coming 
to class when others present. Further details on how this aspect of participation is allotted 
marks will be provided closer to the presentations.  
Personal Leadership Portfolio 
The purpose of the ‘Personal Leadership Portfolio’ (PLP) is to provide an opportunity and 
framework for self-assessment and critical reflection, as well as serving as a record of your 
leadership skill development to date. The PLP has been adapted from “The Bases of 
Competence: Skills for Lifelong Learning and Employability” (Evers, Frederick T., Rush, James, 
C., and Berdow, Iris, 1998). The PLP is divided into smaller assignment components that will 
be developed and electronically submitted in draft form as listed on the schedule indicated 
above. At the end of the course, each of the individual assignment components will be 
finalized, assembled into the total Personal Leadership Portfolio, and submitted via the 
course website dropbox. The grade for this component of class evaluation will be for the 
overall submission. There is no penalty on late submissions of individual weekly draft 
submissions, however, it is highly recommended to submit these on time to make your work 
more manageable. Particulars of the assignment will be discussed in class and posted on the 
course website. 
Group Assignment 
In groups you will be asked to apply a particular leadership theory and an additional one 
chosen by the group to analyze a specific leader indicated in the assignment. You will be 
asked to use the leadership constructs in that particular theory as a lens to provide insight 
into the leader under consideration. You will also be expected to critically evaluate the 
inherent limitations and strengths of the particular theory you have been assigned in light of 
your analysis. You will then use the other theory that your group has chosen to supplement 
your analysis and describe how this lens provides insight into features that were not fully 
understood by the initial analysis. The choice of leaders will be discussed in class. Groups will 
present during their designated date on the course syllabus. 
6 
 
Final Exam 
The final exam will also present an opportunity to assess your knowledge of theories, models, 
and concepts, and your ability to apply your knowledge to various organizational contexts. The 
final exam will cover all course material (e.g., textbook, class notes, and learning activities). It 
is not a requirement in this course that you need to pass the final exam to pass the course. The 
final exam will contain some questions in which you will need to integrate and apply 
information from the entire course. The format of the exam will be a mix of applied and 
conceptual multiple-choice questions. The final exam is cumulative. 
 
Teaching and Learning Practices   
  
Role of 
Instructor 
The role of the instructor is to stimulate and guide discussions to achieve 
learning objectives. This may involve asking questions that probe the depth of 
your understanding of issues, reviewing a theoretical concept that is difficult 
to understand, and encouraging students to present different points of view. 
In my course, students should expect the following from me: 
Grading and Feedback: Grades will be posted on the course website for all 
work completed within a maximum of two weeks after the assignment due 
date. I am happy to discuss your assignments and/or exam results if required 
during office hours. I will also aim to provide you with valuable developmental 
feedback that will be useful to you in improving future work.  
Communication: While I endeavour to check my email daily, students 
can reasonably expect a response from me within 48/72 hours (not 
including weekends or holidays). Also, I will be communicating with you 
via your University of Guelph central email account <@uoguelph.ca> 
from time to time. You are required to check this account on a regular 
basis. Please be advised that I will not edit my mailing list to your 
Hotmail/Gmail/Yahoo etc. account, nor will messages from those 
accounts be answered. 
 
Role of 
Students 
Because learning occurs best when involvement is high, the best courses are 
ones in which there is a lot of interaction among students and the professor. 
To create this type of learning environment, I have the following expectations 
from students: 
Attendance: Because interaction is central, and also because your fellow 
group members will be relying on you for ideas, I expect you to attend every 
class possible. If you do not attend class, you will miss out on important 
material (e.g., content on the exam) and learning opportunities. **It is your 
responsibility to keep informed of changes, new materials, and missed 
content. If you miss class, for whatever reason, it is your responsibility to 
obtain the missed material from classmates. I am happy to answer clarifying 
questions about the material during my office hours.  
Preparation: You are expected to read assigned material and to be fully 
prepared for discussions every week. Adequate preparation is key to 
7 
 
meaningfully engage in the learning process. As you are likely aware of by 
now, it is very easy to fall behind on your readings. Learning is most successful 
when done over time and with practice. Therefore, to do your best in this 
course you must keep up with the weekly readings and learning activities. 
Participation: Class participation affords you the opportunity to develop skills 
in oral communication, presenting a point of view, listening, as well as helping 
your peers learn and learning from them. Therefore, your participation in this 
class is integral to the learning experience—both your own and that of your 
classmates. We will be engaging in several active learning classroom 
techniques that require occasional participation in pairs, small groups, and 
large discussion. 
Teamwork: The vast majority of companies use some form of teamwork 
in their environments. To prepare you for your careers, group work is a 
component of this course. Group work enables you to share ideas and to 
improve communication skills. Through interaction, you will discover for 
yourself the meaning of concepts, the subtleties inherent in everyday 
business situations, and the rationales for various solutions to 
managerial problems. In this course, the teams will be self-managed, 
meaning that issues with time, effort, and planning of your group 
meetings will be the responsibility of team members. 
  
Course Resources 
Required Text: 
Leadership Theory and Practice 8th Edition. Northouse P., 2018.Thousand Oaks: Sage. 
 
The purpose of the course textbook is to provide you with a variety of information and 
materials to support you in the development of your understanding of Leadership, from the 
perspective of both theory and application. “Leadership Theory and Practice” analyzes the 
important Leadership theories, giving specific attention to how each theoretical approach can 
be applied in real-world organizations (and those specifically in a North American and/or 
European context). The text is a useful resource for exploring how Leadership theory can 
inform and direct the way Leadership is practiced. 
 
The text is available at the Bookstore and Co-op Bookstore and is also on reserve at the 
library. 
Recommended Text: None 
Other Resources:  
This course uses a variety of materials and resources. One of your primary resources will be 
the CourseLink website (https://courselink.uoguelph.ca). Course announcements and 
updates will be posted here. You will also be able to access any handouts you may have 
missed through this site. You are expected to check this site on a regular basis. 
 
Course Policies 
8 
 
 
Grading Policies 
The time and date for assessments are indicated in this course outline. 
 
The procedure for grading, along with other important grading information for the research 
experience, is available in the instructions posted on the course website. 
 
The time and date for submitting assessments are listed in this course outline. The procedure 
to submit assessments is indicated in the instructions that will be posted on CourseLink. Late 
submissions for the PLP report will be penalized 10% of the marking grade per day (e.g., if the 
report is out of 70, that is 7 marks deducted per day late regardless of the grade earned). 
Please note that technology issues (e.g., hard drive crashing--make sure to have backups) and 
leisure travel are not valid reasons for extensions.  
 
Please also note that work submitted for grades may be screened electronically for academic 
misconduct, including breaches of academic integrity and plagiarism. In this course, your 
instructor will be using Turnitin, integrated with the CourseLink Dropbox tool, to detect 
possible plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration or copying as part of the ongoing efforts to 
maintain academic integrity at the University of Guelph. 
 
All submitted assignments will be included as source documents in the Turnitin.com 
reference database solely for the purpose of detecting plagiarism of such papers. Use of the 
Turnitin.com service is subject to the Usage Policy posted on the Turnitin.com site. 
 
A major benefit of using Turnitin is that students will be able to educate and empower 
themselves in preventing academic misconduct. In this course, you may screen your own 
assignments through Turnitin before the due date. You will be able to see and print reports 
that show you exactly where you have properly and improperly referenced the outside 
sources and materials in your assignment. 
 
The last date to submit any materials for evaluation for this course is the last day before the 
final exam period starts, November 29th 2019 at 5pm, with the exception of the final exam, 
which will be conducted during the final exam period.  
 
Please note that there will be no supplemental evaluation/examination for this course. 
 
Course Policy on Group Work: 
You are responsible for fulfilling your duties to your group. At a minimum, this includes: 
accurately completing and handing in your Student Information sheet; checking and 
responding to your email/texts from them daily; promptly attending all group meetings, 
including those with the TA and professor; conducting your work diligently; having open 
conversations about group dynamics and individual performance; honestly, fairly, and 
promptly completing any peer evaluation (if applicable). In cases where a group member fails 
to participate in the assignments, their group may fire this individual after consulting with the 
instructor. This will result in the individual receiving a penalty on group assignments and 
being required to complete an additional assignment in place of the group work. Further 
explanation of this process will be provided in supplementary documentation.  
9 
 
 
Policy on missed classes and exams 
All of the information related to the logistical and administrative components of this course 
will be communicated during class time. If you miss a class, it is your responsibility to make 
contact with a fellow student and catch up on what you missed, regardless of whether the 
absence was justified or not. 
 
If you miss an evaluation (e.g., exam, due date for an assignment) you may wish to seek 
academic consideration for your absence (e.g., if you believe your absence qualifies for 
medical or compassionate reasons). Please contact the course instructor as soon as possible 
if you miss an exam or a due date or if you have an ongoing personal or health issue that will 
affect your ability to meet any due date or deadline. 
 
Any documentation provided (e.g., doctor’s notes) may be verified by different means, 
including calling the doctor’s office for confirmation. See the undergraduate calendar for 
detailed information on regulations and procedures for Academic Consideration. 
 
Policy regarding use of electronic devices and recording of lectures: 
Electronic recording of classes is expressly forbidden without consent of the instructor. When 
recordings are permitted, they are solely for the use of the authorized student and may not 
be reproduced, or transmitted to others, without the express written consent of the 
instructor. 
 
Policy regarding materials provided by instructor and their designates 
The material shared by the course instructor or by his designate (e.g., TA) as part of this 
course, including copies of the lecture slides, are solely for the personal use of the authorized 
student and may NOT be reproduced, or transmitted to others, whether it is in their original 
format or a modified version, without the express written consent of the course instructor. 
 
Policy on emails 
Only questions that can be answered simply, for example by yes or no or with a short 
sentence, will be answered by email. For longer answers you will most likely receive an email 
asking you to come and see me. 
 
Emails will usually be answered within 24 to 48 hours during weekdays. It is possible that 
some emails that are not from a university address (e.g., @hotmail.com) may be treated as 
spam. So do not hesitate to come and see your instructor or TA if your email was not 
answered. The university expects you to check your U of Guelph email account regularly, and 
us to use it to communicate with you. 
 
Policy regarding exam copies 
Copies of the exam are loaned to registered students for the duration of the examination only. 
They remain the property of the course instructor at all times. All copies must be returned to 
the instructor or their designate at the end of the examination time. They cannot be removed 
from the examination room under any circumstances. All material contained in the exams is 
copyrighted, and may not be reproduced, or transmitted to others, without the express written 
consent of the instructor. 
10 
 
 
University Policies  
Academic Consideration 
When you find yourself unable to meet an in-course requirement because of illness or 
compassionate reasons, please advise the course instructor in writing, with your name, id#, 
and e-mail contact. See the academic calendar for information on regulations and procedures 
for Academic Consideration: 
http://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-ac.shtml 
Academic Misconduct 
The University of Guelph is committed to upholding the highest standards of academic integrity 
and it is the responsibility of all members of the University community, faculty, staff, and 
students  to be aware of what constitutes academic misconduct and to do as much as possible 
to prevent academic offences from occurring.  
University of Guelph students have the responsibility of abiding by the University's policy on 
academic misconduct regardless of their location of study; faculty, staff and students have the 
responsibility of supporting an environment that discourages misconduct. Students need to 
remain aware that instructors have access to and the right to use electronic and other means 
of detection. Please note: Whether or not a student intended to commit academic misconduct 
is not relevant for a finding of guilt. Hurried or careless submission of assignments does not 
excuse students from responsibility for verifying the academic integrity of their work before 
submitting it. Students who are in any doubt as to whether an action on their part could be 
construed as an academic offence should consult with a faculty member or faculty advisor.  
The Academic Misconduct Policy is detailed in the Undergraduate Calendar: 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-
amisconduct.shtml  
Accessibility 
The University of Guelph is committed to creating a barrier-free environment. Providing 
services for students is a shared responsibility among students, faculty and administrators. This 
relationship is based on respect of individual rights, the dignity of the individual and the 
University community's shared commitment to an open and supportive learning environment. 
Students requiring service or accommodation, whether due to an identified, ongoing disability 
or a short-term disability should contact Student Accessibility Services as soon as possible.  
For more information, contact SAS at 519-824-4120 ext. 56208 or email sas@uoguelph.ca or 
see the website: https://wellness.uoguelph.ca/accessibility/  
Course Evaluation Information 
Please refer to the Course and Instructor Evaluation Website 
Recording of Materials  
11 
 
 
 
 
Date Submitted to Chair: 
 
 
Chair Signature (Approval): 
 
 
Sandra Scott 
Date Approved by Chair: 
 
26 August 2019 
 
Presentations which are made in relation to course work—including lectures—cannot be 
recorded or copied without the permission of the presenter, whether the instructor, a 
classmate or guest lecturer. Material recorded with permission is restricted to use for that 
course unless further permission is granted. 
Drop date 
The last date to drop one-semester courses, without academic penalty is November 29, 
2019.  For regulations and procedures for Dropping Courses, please see the Undergraduate 
Calendar for Policies and Procedures.  
 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-drop.shtml 
 
 
