 
 
 
HROB*3030 Occupational Health and Safety 
Winter 2019 
Credit Weight 0.50 
General Course Information 
Instructor: Dr. Ellen Choi 
Email echoi03@uoguelph.ca 
 
Office Location  220 Macdonald Hall 
Office Hours  Monday 12-2pm or by appointment.  Please reference HROB3030 in your email subject 
title so your email can be prioritized. 
Department/School Department of Management 
  
Class Schedule:  Tuesdays and Thursdays – 4:00 PM – 5:20 PM  
Class Location TBD 
  
Final Exam: TBA 
Pre-requisites: 9.00 credits including (1 of BUS*3000, HROB*2100, HROB*2290, HROB*3000, 
PSYC*3070) 
Co-requisites: BUS*3030, PSYC*3060 
Restrictions: This is a Priority Access Course and some restrictions may apply during some time periods. 
Please contact the department for more information. 
Course Description  
The major objective of this course is to introduce Human Resources Professionals to this broad and ever changing 
field. Occupational Health and Safety, is an inherently technical subject far broader than legislation only. The multiple 
dimensions of the various issues - technical, legislative, political and personal are a required part of the training for a 
professional in this field. 
Occupational health and safety is an essential part of organizational success and an important element of an 
organization’s responsibility towards its human resource capital and other key organizational stakeholders. The 
management of occupational health and safety issues and initiatives is an integral part of organizational 
performance. This course takes a balanced approach to the management of occupational health and safety in a 
business environment including a focus on the employee, employer and government roles. 
Human resources professionals are expected to take a leadership role in ensuring occupational health and safety is 
integrated into organization’s operations. This course will introduce potential Human Resources Managers to the 
increasingly important role of organizational and employee responsibility for occupational health and safety. 
 
 
 
Course Learning Outcomes 
 
Upon successfully completing this course, you will be able to: 
 
1) Promote the health and safety of employees through an understanding of legislation, regulations, and standards to 
increase organizational awareness, ensure compliance, and manage risk. 
 
2) Develop health, safety, and wellness policies, procedures, roles and responsibilities for leaders and employees, to 
ensure compliance through training, monitoring, and providing appropriate safeguards and disability management. 
 
3) Encourage employee wellness by endorsing healthy lifestyles, educating employees, and providing opportunities 
for enhancement of wellness to sustain overall employee and organizational health. 
 
4) Describe a proactive approach to mental health and psychological well-being in the workplace by enhancing 
awareness at all levels of the organization to improve performance. 
 
5) Interpret legislation and policies consistent with legal requirements and organizational values to treat employees in 
a fair and consistent manner and manage the risk of litigation and conflict. 
 
6) Apply an evidence-based approach to the development of human resources policies and practices using current 
professional resources to provide a sound basis for human resources decision-making. 
 
7) Analyze common workplace environments to identify physical, chemical, biological, and psychosocial hazards. 
 
8) Describe and assess prevention training strategies associated with physical/chemical/biological hazards, 
psychosocial hazards, and stress mitigation. 
 
 
 
 
Indicative Content 
Winter 2019 Class Schedule 
Week Date Topics Readings/Assignments 
1 January 8 
 
January 10 
Course Introduction 
Introduction to OH&S 
Legislative Framework 
Introduction  
Chapter 1. Introduction 
Chapter 2. Legislative Framework 
2 January 15 
 
January 17 
Workers' Compensation 
 
Hazard Recognition, Risk 
Assessment and Control 
Chapter 3. Workers' Compensation 
 
Chapter 4.  Hazard Recognition, Assessment, and Control 
In-Class exercise #1 
3 January 22 
 
 
 
January 24 
Physical Agents 
Chemical, and Biological 
Agents 
 
Field Study 
Chapter 5.  Physical Agents 
Chapter 6. Chemical and Biological Agents  
 
 
Visit Organization for assessment 
4 January 29 Psychosocial Hazards Chapter 7. Psychosocial Hazards 
 
 
 
January 31   
Workplace Violence 
 
 
 
Training 
Chapter 8. Workplace Violence 
In-Class exercise #2 
 
Chapter 9. Training 
5 February 5 
 
 
February 7 
Motivation  
Incident Investigation 
 
Workplace Wellness 
Chapter 10. Motivation 
Chapter 12. Incident Investigation 
 
Chapter 14. Workplace Wellness 
In-class exercise #3 
 
6 
February 12 
February 14 
Midterm Review 
MIDTERM                                                                                                                       
Midterm (Chapters 7,8,9,10,12) 
 February 18 Winter Break    
7 February 26  
February 28 
Field Study 
Guest Speaker 
Visit Organization to present recommendations 
Workplace Mental Health – Guest Speaker 
8 March 6 
March 8   
Group Presentations 
Group Presentations 
Group #1 and #2 
Group #3 and #4 
9 March 13 
March 15 
Group Presentations 
Group Presentations 
Group #5 and #6 
Group #7 and #8 
10 March 20 
March 22 
Group Presentations 
Group Presentations 
Group #9 and #10 
Group #11 and #12 
11 March 27 
March 29 
Group Presentations 
Group Presentations 
Group #13 and #14 
Group #15 and #16 
12 April 2 Final Exam Review Group Project Written Report Due 
  Final Exam – Date = TBA - (Chapters 1-14) 
Note: The schedule of topics and the other learning activities may require modification from time to time.  Any 
changes will be announced in class and/or on the Courselink site. 
 
Course Assessment 
Components Weights Description Associated Learning 
Outcomes 
Due Date/ location 
Assessment 1:  15% In-Class Exercises  
(5% x 3 Exercises) 
1-8 On-going/Classroom 
Assessment 2: 25% Group Project 
(Written 15%; 
Presentation 10%) 
1-8 On-going/ 
April 2/ 
Classroom 
Assessment 3:  30% Mid-Term Exam 
(Chapters 7,8,9,10,12) 
1, 2, 5, 7, 8 February 14, 
2019/Classroom 
Assessment 4:  30% Final Exam 1-8 TBA 
 
Total:  100%    
 
Note: The numbers of associated learning outcomes are consistent with those in the section, "Course Learning Outcomes". 
In-Class Exercises (15%) 
You are expected to attend class and complete a series of exercises. The exercises will occur during normally 
scheduled class time. There will be 5 exercises, each worth 3%. Some exercises will be completed individually and 
the others in-pairs, or with a group. Each individual/group will be given specific scenarios, and will respond, in writing, 
to the assigned questions. Responses must be submitted to the drop box before leaving class. More details to follow. 
Group Project (25%) 
Studying a real organization, each group needs to identify advantages and disadvantages of the organization's 
OH&S practices, and to recommend some actions for the organization to improve its OH&S performance. The group 
project has two components: written report (10%) and presentation (15%). The group will have two field visits to the 
organization where they 1) go into the workplace to observe/assess/identify advantages and disadvantages; and 2) 
go back to the workplace to present their recommendations to the organization.  
 
The written report must be handed to the instructor before the group presentation. The format of the report shall not 
exceed 10 pages (excluding any appendices or references), double-spaced, 1″ margins on all sides, and 12-point 
Times New Roman font. The report will be evaluated on style (grammar, etc.) and content (the extent and quality of 
analysis and recommendations).  
 
Reports should outline the following: 
● What is the hazard of concern? 
● What are the risks if this hazard is not addressed/benefits if this hazard is addressed? 
● What practices are currently in place to address these hazards? (Needs Analysis) 
● What recommendations do you have for this organization with respect to this hazard? (Training Design and 
Delivery) 
● What are the barriers to change and how will you motivate safety behaviour? (Motivation) 
● How will you know if the training and OH&S practices are effective (Training Evaluation) 
● Create a 2-3-minute micro-learning video that summarizes your report (this will be presented in-class and 
shared with the organization) 
 
Each group will conduct a presentation based on their group written report.  Creativity is strongly encouraged (and 
will be marked). Due to time constraints, each group presentation will be limited to approximately 30 minutes. 
 
Mid-Term Exam (30%) 
The mid-term exam is closed-book, covering readings and lectures referring to Chapter 7, 8, 9, 10, and 12. The 
format of the mid-term exam will be multiple-choice and short-answer questions. More details will be provided closer 
to the exam date. 
 
It is imperative that you attend the mid-term exam since there may be no other alternative dates to write a make-
up exam. If you cannot complete the mid-term exam because you are sick and you present a doctor’s note, the 
value of your midterm exam will be transferred to the final exam (i.e., the weight of your final exam will be changed 
from 30% to 60%). 
Final Exam (30%) 
The final exam is cumulative, covering readings and lectures from the entire course.  
 
The final exam is closed-book, and will be made up of multiple-choice and short-answer questions. More details will 
be provided closer to the exam date. 
 
If you are registered with the Centre for Students with Disabilities and will require some form of accommodation in the completion of the required 
learning activities for this course, please meet with me during the first week of classes. 
 
Course Resources 
Required Texts: 
Kelloway, E.K. and Francis, L. and Gatien B. (2017). Management of Occupational Health and Safety (Seventh 
Edition). Toronto: Nelson  
 
Ontario Occupational Health and Safety Act (OHSA) available online: 
http://www.e-laws.gov.on.ca/html/statutes/english/elaws_statutes_90o01_e.htm  
 
Guide to the Ontario Health and Safety Act (OHSA Guide) available online: 
http://www.labour.gov.on.ca/english/hs/pubs/ohsa/index.php 
Other Resources: 
This course uses a variety of materials and resources.  One of your primary resources will be the course website 
(http://courselink.uoguelph.ca). All announcements, required and recommended readings, assignments and updates 
will be posted there. Check the course site often. 
Course Policies 
 
All course grading will adhere to the University grading resolutions that outline its standards for determining and 
assigning grades. The text for all 11 grading resolutions, as approved by Senate, appears in the current 
Undergraduate Calendar in Section VIII, by clicking on “Grades” , then “Grading Procedures” headings 
http://www.uoguelph.ca/undergrad_calendar/c08/c08-grds-proc.shtml  
 
Grading Policies 
All assignments and exams will be marked and returned to students within two weeks of the due date by way of the 
course website. Grades will be posted on the course website for all work completed within a maximum of two 
weeks.  If you would like to discuss your graded assignments and exams with me, please email me a bullet point list 
of issues you would like to discuss so we can have a comprehensive and focused conversation. 
 
● 80 - 100 (A) Excellent. An outstanding performance in which the student demonstrates a superior grasp of the 
subject matter, and an ability to go beyond the given material in a critical and constructive manner. The student 
demonstrates a high degree of creative and/or logical thinking, a superior ability to organize, to analyze, and to 
integrate ideas, and a thorough familiarity with the appropriate literature and techniques.  
● 70 - 79 (B) Good. A more than adequate performance in which the student demonstrates a thorough grasp of the 
subject matter, and an ability to organize and examine the material in a critical and constructive manner. The 
student demonstrates a good understanding of the relevant issues and a familiarity with the appropriate literature 
and techniques.  
● 60 - 69 (C) Acceptable. An adequate performance in which the student demonstrates a generally adequate grasp 
of the subject matter and a moderate ability to examine the material in a critical and constructive manner. The 
student displays an adequate understanding of the relevant issues, and a general familiarity with the appropriate 
literature and techniques.  
● 50 - 59 (D) Minimally Acceptable. A barely adequate performance in which the student demonstrates a familiarity 
with the subject matter, but whose attempts to examine the material in a critical and constructive manner are only 
partially successful. The student displays some understanding of the relevant issues, and some familiarity with the 
appropriate literature and techniques.  
● 0 - 49 (F) Fail. An inadequate performance. 
Please note that these policies are binding unless academic consideration is given to an individual student. 
Course Policy on Group Work: 
There will be no peer evaluation for the group project. Groups are expected to have all members present and 
working at group meetings, and contributing as agreed upon by the group.  Groups are expected to alert the 
instructor to missing or non-contributing group members; those who do not regularly attend group meetings or do not 
contribute at a level agreed upon by the group will receive a lower grade for the group project (down to 0%). More 
details of the group project will be provided in class. 
Course Policy regarding use of electronic devices and recording of lectures: 
Electronic recording of classes is expressly forbidden without consent of the instructor.  When recordings are 
permitted they are solely for the use of the authorized student and may not be reproduced, or transmitted to others, 
without the express written consent of the instructor. 
 
University Policies 
Academic Consideration 
When you find yourself unable to meet an in-course requirement because of illness or compassionate reasons, please 
advise the course instructor in writing, with your name, id#, and e-mail contact. See the academic calendar for 
information on regulations and procedures for  
Academic Consideration: http://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-ac.shtml 
Academic Misconduct 
The University of Guelph is committed to upholding the highest standards of academic integrity and it is the 
responsibility of all members of the University community, faculty, staff, and students  to be aware of what constitutes 
academic misconduct and to do as much as possible to prevent academic offences from occurring.  
University of Guelph students have the responsibility of abiding by the University's policy on academic misconduct 
regardless of their location of study; faculty, staff and students have the responsibility of supporting an environment 
that discourages misconduct. Students need to remain aware that instructors have access to and the right to use 
electronic and other means of detection. Please note: Whether or not a student intended to commit academic 
misconduct is not relevant for a finding of guilt. Hurried or careless submission of assignments does not excuse 
students from responsibility for verifying the academic integrity of their work before submitting it. Students who are in 
any doubt as to whether an action on their part could be construed as an academic offence should consult with a 
faculty member or faculty advisor.  
The Academic Misconduct Policy is detailed in the Undergraduate Calendar: 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-amisconduct.shtml 
Accessibility 
The University of Guelph is committed to creating a barrier-free environment. Providing services for students is a 
shared responsibility among students, faculty and administrators. This relationship is based on respect of individual 
rights, the dignity of the individual and the University community's shared commitment to an open and supportive 
learning environment. Students requiring service or accommodation, whether due to an identified, ongoing disability or 
a short-term disability should contact Student Accessibility Services (SAS) as soon as possible.  
For more information, contact SAS at 519-824-4120 ext. 56208 or email accessibility@uoguelph.ca or see the 
website: http://www.uoguelph.ca/csd/ 
Course Evaluation Information 
Please refer to the Course and Instructor Evaluation Website 
Drop date 
The last date to drop one-semester courses, without academic penalty, is March 9, 2018. For regulations and 
procedures for Dropping Courses, see the Academic Calendar:  
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-drop.shtml 
 
