1 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   HROB 2090 
                           Individuals and Groups in Organizations 
 Fall 2019 
  0.5 Credits 
  
General Course Information 
Instructor: Thomas Sasso, MA, PhD Candidate 
Email tsasso@uoguelph.ca  
Office Location  MacDonald Hall 217 
Office Hours  Thursdays 10:00am – 11:30am  
Department/School Management 
  
Class Schedule:  Tuesdays and Thursdays 4:00pm – 5:20pm  
ROZ 104 
Pre-requisites:  
Restrictions: HROB 2100, HROB 4000, PSYC 3080 
 
Course Description  
The course serves as an overview to organizational behaviour. It examines the individual, the 
group, the organization and how the three interrelate in order to enhance performance and 
productivity. 
In particular, this course will introduce you to a wide array of theories on topics relevant to 
understanding employee and managerial behaviour and provide insight and hands-on 
experience on how to use this knowledge to address problems that you will face in 
organizations. Some of the topics covered in this course include: the study of personality, 
motivation, work attitudes, leaders, diversity and inclusion, decision-making, power, 
organizational change, and organizational culture. Some of the questions we will address 
include: How do we effectively motivate employees? How does personality affect job 
performance? And, what leadership styles are effective with different employees? We will 
apply theories and tie them to examples of real-world applications. 
Course Learning Outcomes    
Upon successfully completing this course, you will: 
 
Knowledge and Understanding: 
1. Describe OB theories, models, and concepts presented in the course  
2. Describe the role of individual level (micro), and group and organizational level 
(macro) factors in fostering organizational success 
3. Analyze and evaluate OB information in order to critically assess its credibility and 
quality 
 
2 
 
4. Explain how evidence-based management is used to diagnose problems and provide 
solutions to organizations 
Discipline/Professional and Transferable Skills: 
5. Demonstrate skills critical to future success as employees and managers including:  
o Critical thinking and problem-solving through the examination of 
organizational case studies and academic literatures 
o Written communication skills by developing academic and applied reports 
6. Apply the OB theories, models, and concepts to organizational settings 
 
Attitudes and Values 
7. Communicate and work professionally with peers and provide peer feedback and 
evaluation through peer assessments 
 
Summary of Course Content and Materials 
Course Schedule and Key Dates: The following schedule is subject to modification by the 
professor with notice in the previous class. If you miss a class, please make sure that you 
contact me or a fellow student to stay up to date with any potential changes. 
 
Date Lecture Topic/ Assessment Readings  
Sept 5 1 Course Overview/ 
Assignment Explanations 
• Course Syllabus, Assignment 
Outlines 
Sept 10 2 Introduction to 
Organizational Behaviour 
and Management 
 
• Chapter 1 
• Watch the TedTalk video “How to 
run a company with (almost) no 
rules” by Ricardo Semler. 
Sept 12 3 Management Decision 
Making & Evidence Based 
Management 
• Chapter 11 
• Watch the TedTalk video “The 
paradox of choice” by Barry 
Schwartz 
• Watch the TedTalk video 
“Battling bad science” by Ben 
Goldacre. 
Sept 17 4 Personality and Learning • Chapter 2 
• Watch the TedTalk video “The 
surprising habits of original 
thinkers” by Adam Grant 
Sept 19 5 Personality and Learning/ 
Perception and Attribution 
• Watch the TedTalk video “The 
power of introverts” by Susan 
Cain. 
Sept 24 6 Perception and Attribution • Chapter 3  
• Watch the TedTalk video “Color 
blind or color brave” by Mellody 
Hobson. 
3 
 
Sept 26 7 Values, Attitudes, and Work 
Behaviour 
 
• Chapter 4 
• Watch the TedTalk video “The 
happy secret to better work” by 
Shawn Achor  
Oct 1 8 Diversity in Organizations 
 
 
• Watch the TedX video “The 
surprising solution to workplace 
diversity” by Arwa Mahdawi 
Oct 3 9 Work Motivation  
 
 
• Chapter 5 
• Watch the TedTalk video “Are 
you a giver or a taker” by Adam 
Grant 
Oct 8 10 Work Motivation 
 
• Chapter 6 
• Watch the TedTalk video “The 
puzzle of motivation” by Dan Pink  
Oct 10 11 Independent Study - No Class  
Oct 15 12 Thanksgiving Break – No 
Class  
 
Oct 17 13 Communication • Chapter 10 
• Watch the TedTalk video “Your 
body language shapes who you 
are” by Amy Cuddy 
Oct 22 14 Review Class  
Oct 24 15 Midterm Exam  
Oct 29 16 Social Influence, 
Socialization, and 
Organizational Culture 
• Chapter 8 
Oct 31 17 Groups and Teamwork • Chapter 7 
• Watch the TedTalk video “Tales 
of creativity and play” by Tim 
Brown 
Nov 5 18 Leadership • Chapter 9 
• Watch the TedTalk video “How 
great leaders inspire action” by 
Simon Sinek 
Nov 7 19 Power, Politics, and Ethics • Chapter 12 
Nov 12 20 Conflict and Stress • Chapter 13 
Nov 14 21 Conflict and Stress • Watch the TedTalk video “How to 
make stress your friend” by Kelly 
McGonigal 
4 
 
Nov 19 22 Environment, Strategy, and 
Structure;  
• Chapter 14 
• Watch the TedTalk video “Why 
work doesn't happen at work” by 
Jason Fried  
Nov 21 23 Organizational Change, 
Development, and 
Innovation 
• Chapter 15 
• Watch the TedTalk video “Tales 
of Creativity and Play” by Tim 
Brown 
Nov 26 24 Exam Review  
Nov 28 25 Independent Study - No Class  
 
Instructor lectures will be coordinated with the readings. To genuinely benefit from this 
course, you need to do the readings prior to attending lectures. Otherwise your experience 
will be mixed. Additionally, students should consider reviewing content from the readings 
after lectures to note content that has received additional attention and expansion during 
the lecture. Due to the extensive content in the textbook, and within the literature, my goal is 
to review some of the more complex concepts and bridge them with applied purpose. 
 
Not all assigned material will be covered in class. Students are nonetheless expected to 
understand all of the assigned materials and come to class prepared to ask questions about 
anything they do not understand fully. Please note that casually reading the textbook will not 
be sufficient for you to earn a good grade. You should plan to go through the relevant 
chapters in your textbook several times for a deep understanding and integration of the 
content. 
 
Students may benefit from self-designed study groups or other learning structures to support 
their understanding of lecture content and assigned readings. 
  
Course Assessment 
 . 
 
 Associated 
Learning 
Outcomes 
Due Date/ 
location 
     
Assessment 1: 18% Weekly Online Quizzes 
(12 x 1.5%) 
LO 4, 5 Weekly 
     
Assessment 2: 16% Discussion Participation 
(2 x 8%) 
LO 1, 2, 3, 4, 7 As detailed 
below 
     
Assessment 3: 26% Midterm Exam LO 1,2, 3, 5, 6 Oct 24th in class 
     
Assessment 4: 40% Final Exam LO 1,2, 3, 5, 6 TBD 
     
Total  100%    
 
5 
 
 
Weekly Online Quizzes 
Each week you will be required to do readings, watch a TEDTalk video, and then complete a 
short multiple-choice quiz. Each quiz will contain approximately 8 questions. Quizzes will 
assess whether you grasped the main take home message of each video (including the major 
research findings discussed in the video) as well as a few key concepts from the chapter. 
Quizzes will open at 12:00am on the Friday of each week and close at 11:59pm on that same 
Friday. 
 
The videos were selected to supplement your learning in the course for several reasons. First, 
many of the videos present research by leading scholars (not discussed in your textbook or 
other readings) that will further your knowledge of organizational behaviour. Second, many 
of the videos challenge common long-standing myths about various aspects of organizational 
behaviour (e.g., how to motivate people, how to foster creativity, etc.). The primary learning 
objectives of these videos are to enhance your critical thinking skills, and to reinforce the 
importance of using research evidence versus common sense/myths, etc. to make informed 
decisions about individuals and groups in organizations.  
 
Quiz 1: September 13th  
Quiz 2: September 20th  
Quiz 3: September 27th  
Quiz 4: October 4th  
Quiz 5: October 11th  
Quiz 6: October 18th  
Quiz 7: October 25th  
Quiz 8: November 1st  
Quiz 9: November 8th  
Quiz 10: November 15th  
Quiz 11: November 22nd  
Quiz 12: November 29th  
Discussion Participation  
In this course, there are six (6) discussions (see below for dates). Each student is required to 
participate by providing a minimum of 3 discussion posts for each of the 6 discussions. The 
student’s posts are to include (as a minimum) a response to the original posed question by 
the instructor, as well as two additional posts in response to comments posed by two of your 
peers. Please see the grading rubric for more details.  
 
For grading purposes, the instructor will select, at random, two of your discussions for 
grading. One of these will be randomly selected from the first three discussions (i.e., 
Discussions 1-3) and one will be randomly selected from the last three discussions (i.e., 
Discussions 4-6). Only the randomly selected activities will be evaluated. Entries for activities 
that are not selected for marking will not be evaluated and may not be substituted for those 
to be marked. Moreover, submissions made once students are informed of which unit was 
randomly selected for grading will not be graded (e.g., no late submissions). Entries for each 
discussion will be checked that they were completed, failure to complete discussion posts on 
6 
 
weeks that are not graded will result in a penalty to your discussion participation grade in the 
course for each missed component of the discussion. 
 
Discussion 1: Opens September 5th at 12:00am ET. Closes September 15th at 11:59pm. 
Discussion 2: Opens September 23rd at 12:00am ET. Closes September 29th at 11:59pm. 
Discussion 3: Opens October 14th at 12:00am ET. Closes October 20th at 11:59pm. 
Discussion 4: Opens October 28th at 12:00am ET. Closes November 3rd at 11:59pm. 
Discussion 5: Opens November 11th at 12:00am ET. Closes November 17th at 11:59pm. 
Discussion 6: Opens November 18th at 12:00am ET. Closes November 24th at 11:59pm. 
Midterm Exam  
The midterm exam will present an opportunity to assess your knowledge of OB theories, 
models, and concepts, and your ability to apply your knowledge to various organizational 
contexts. The midterm exam will cover all course material (e.g., textbook, readings, class 
notes, and learning activities) up to the date of the midterm. The midterm exam will focus on 
chapters, assigned readings, and course learning activities, and will contain some questions in 
which you will need to integrate and apply information from the entire course. The format of 
the exam will be multiple-choice questions.  
Final Exam 
The final exam will also present an opportunity to assess your knowledge of OB theories, 
models, and concepts, and your ability to apply your knowledge to various organizational 
contexts. The final exam will cover all course material (e.g., textbook, class notes, and 
learning activities). It is not a requirement in this course that you need to pass the final exam 
to pass the course. The final exam will contain some questions in which you will need to 
integrate and apply information from the entire course. The format of the exam will be a mix 
of applied and conceptual multiple-choice questions. The final exam is cumulative, however 
more emphasis will be placed on content following the midterm exam. 
Bonus Assessment - TopHat 
To improve students’ performance and participation during the class, in this course TopHat  
will be used to offer students the chance to earn up to 5% bonus in the class. You’re required 
to purchase the access to this website if you wish to participate (information is provided in 
the required resources section). During the class, through TopHat, the instructor will ask you 
some questions related to materials we cover in lecture. You will be given time to answer the 
question. In terms of grading TopHat, some marks will be given for participation (any answer) 
and other marks will be earned based on selecting the correct answer. In total TopHat 
contribution to your total mark would be up to 5% bonus towards your final grade. Should 
any student have any concerns regarding the use of TopHat they are required to advise the 
professor during the first week of classes. 
 
Please note that if you were unable to subscribe and participate in TopHat for any reason, 
you will be given the option to write a quiz from the whole course materials (including all  
textbook chapters), which will be considered in lieu of participating in TopHat. This has to 
 be advised to the professor and confirmed during the first week of classes. 
 
 
7 
 
Teaching and Learning Practices   
  
Role of 
Instructor 
The role of the instructor is to stimulate and guide discussions to achieve 
learning objectives. This may involve asking questions that probe the depth of 
your understanding of issues, reviewing a theoretical concept that is difficult 
to understand, and encouraging students to present different points of view. 
In my course, students should expect the following from me: 
Grading and Feedback: Grades will be posted on the course website for all 
work completed within a maximum of two weeks after the assignment due 
date. I am happy to discuss your assignments and/or exam results if required 
during office hours. I will also aim to provide you with valuable developmental 
feedback that will be useful to you in improving future work.  
Communication: While I endeavour to check my email daily, students 
can reasonably expect a response from me within 48/72 hours (not 
including weekends or holidays). Also, I will be communicating with you 
via your University of Guelph central email account <@uoguelph.ca> 
from time to time. You are required to check this account on a regular 
basis. Please be advised that I will not edit my mailing list to your 
Hotmail/Gmail/Yahoo etc. account, nor will messages from those 
accounts be answered. 
 
Role of 
Students 
Because learning occurs best when involvement is high, the best courses are 
ones in which there is a lot of interaction among students and the professor. 
To create this type of learning environment, I have the following expectations 
from students: 
Attendance: Because interaction is central, and also because your fellow 
group members will be relying on you for ideas, I expect you to attend every 
class possible. If you do not attend class, you will miss out on important 
material (e.g., content on the exam) and learning opportunities. **It is your 
responsibility to keep informed of changes, new materials, and missed 
content. If you miss class, for whatever reason, it is your responsibility to 
obtain the missed material from classmates. I am happy to answer clarifying 
questions about the material during my office hours.  
Preparation: You are expected to read assigned material and to be fully 
prepared for discussions every week. Adequate preparation is key to 
meaningfully engage in the learning process. As you are likely aware of by 
now, it is very easy to fall behind on your readings. Learning is most successful 
when done over time and with practice. Therefore, to do your best in this 
course you must keep up with the weekly readings and learning activities. 
Participation: Class participation affords you the opportunity to develop skills 
in oral communication, presenting a point of view, listening, as well as helping 
your peers learn and learning from them. Therefore, your participation in this 
class is integral to the learning experience—both your own and that of your 
classmates. We will be engaging in several active learning classroom 
8 
 
techniques that require occasional participation in pairs, small groups, and 
large discussion. 
Teamwork: The vast majority of companies use some form of teamwork 
in their environments. To prepare you for your careers, group work is a 
component of this course. Group work enables you to share ideas and to 
improve communication skills. Through interaction, you will discover for 
yourself the meaning of concepts, the subtleties inherent in everyday 
business situations, and the rationales for various solutions to 
managerial problems. In this course, the teams will be self-managed, 
meaning that issues with time, effort, and planning of your group 
meetings will be the responsibility of team members. 
  
Course Resources 
Required Text: 
Title: Organizational Behaviour: Understanding and Managing Life at Work 
Author(s): Gary Johns and Alan M. Saks 
Edition / Year: 11th Edition / 2019 
Publisher: Pearson Education Canada 
 
REVEL PLATFORM FOR TEXTBOOK AND OTHER LEARNING MATERIALS 
In this course, we will be using Pearson’s Revel platform to access the e-textbook. Here is 
how you can do that:  
1. Go to: https://console.pearson.com/enrollment/6jasqg 
2. Sign in to your Pearson Account or create one.  
3. Redeem your access code purchased from the bookstore or purchase instant access online. 
(Temporary access option for financial aid is also available.) 
 4. You will be provided with the option at this point to purchase a loose-leaf copy for $20.00 
including delivery. You can choose to purchase it now or at a later time (instructions are 
located in your REVEL confirmation email)  
  
Go to the link below to watch a close captioned video on the how to log in to Revel for 
students. https://youtu.be/pavN9npktBI 
  
REVEL 24 Hour Technical Support 
Your best (and quickest) path to resolve technical issues is to contact technical support at the 
link: https://support.pearson.com/getsupport/s/contactsupport 
  
When you contact them please include the following information: 
1. Your username 
2. OS (e.g., Windows 8) 
3. Browser (preferred browser is Chrome) 
4. Exactly what you are trying to open. 
5. Error message (if any) that appears when you try to open it. 
 
9 
 
If your query is not resolved in 24 hours, please email marguerite.weir@pearsoned.com and 
let her know your incident #.  
Recommended Text: None 
Other Resources:  
TopHat 
We will be using the Top Hat (http://www.tophat.com/) classroom response system in class. 
You will be able to submit answers to in-class questions using Apple or Android smartphones 
and tablets, laptops, or through text message.  
You can visit the Top Hat Overview (https://success.tophat.com/s/article/Student-Top-Hat-
Overview-and-Getting-Started-Guide) within the Top Hat Success Center which outlines how 
you will register for a Top Hat account, as well as providing a brief overview to get you up and 
running on the system. 
An email invitation will be sent to you by email, but if don’t receive this email, you can 
register by simply visiting our course website at https://app.tophat.com/e/785209.  
Note: our Course Join Code will be posted on Courselink in advance of us using TopHat. 
Top Hat will require a paid subscription, and a full breakdown of all subscription options 
available can be found at http://www.tophat.com/pricing.  
Should you require assistance with Top Hat at any time, due to the fact that they require 
specific user information to troubleshoot these issues, please contact their Support Team 
directly by way of email (support@tophat.com), the in app support button, or by calling 1-
888-663-5491. 
 
This course uses a variety of materials and resources. One of your primary resources will be 
the CourseLink website (https://courselink.uoguelph.ca). Course announcements and 
updates will be posted here. You will also be able to access any handouts you may have 
missed through this site. You are expected to check this site on a regular basis. 
 
Course Policies 
 
Grading Policies 
The time and date for assessments are indicated in this course outline. 
 
The procedure for grading, along with other important grading information for the research 
experience, is available in the instructions posted on the course website. 
 
The time and date for submitting assessments are listed in this course outline. The procedure 
to submit assessments is indicated in the instructions that will be posted on CourseLink. Late 
submissions will be penalized 10% of the marking grade per day (e.g., if the report is out of 
70, that is 7 marks deducted per day late regardless of the grade earned). Please note that 
technology issues (e.g., hard drive crashing--make sure to have backups) and leisure travel 
are not valid reasons for extensions.  
 
10 
 
Please also note that work submitted for grades may be screened electronically for academic 
misconduct, including breaches of academic integrity and plagiarism. In this course, your 
instructor will be using Turnitin, integrated with the CourseLink Dropbox tool, to detect 
possible plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration or copying as part of the ongoing efforts to 
maintain academic integrity at the University of Guelph. 
 
All submitted assignments will be included as source documents in the Turnitin.com 
reference database solely for the purpose of detecting plagiarism of such papers. Use of the 
Turnitin.com service is subject to the Usage Policy posted on the Turnitin.com site. 
 
A major benefit of using Turnitin is that students will be able to educate and empower 
themselves in preventing academic misconduct. In this course, you may screen your own 
assignments through Turnitin before the due date. You will be able to see and print reports 
that show you exactly where you have properly and improperly referenced the outside 
sources and materials in your assignment. 
 
The last date to submit any materials for evaluation for this course is the last day before the 
final exam period starts, November 29th, 2019 at 5pm, with the exception of the final exam, 
which will be conducted during the final exam period.  
 
Please note that there will be no supplemental evaluation/examination for this course. 
 
Course Policy on Group Work: 
You are responsible for fulfilling your duties to your group if group work is required. At a 
minimum, this includes: accurately completing and handing in your Student Information 
sheet; checking and responding to your email/texts from them daily; promptly attending all 
group meetings, including those with the TA and professor; conducting your work diligently; 
having open conversations about group dynamics and individual performance; honestly, 
fairly, and promptly completing any peer evaluation (if applicable). In cases where a group 
member fails to participate in the assignments, their group may fire this individual after 
consulting with the instructor. This will result in the individual receiving a penalty on group 
assignments and being required to complete an additional assignment in place of the group 
work. Further explanation of this process will be provided in supplementary documentation if 
necessary.  
 
Policy on missed classes and exams 
All of the information related to the logistical and administrative components of this course 
will be communicated during class time. If you miss a class, it is your responsibility to make 
contact with a fellow student and catch up on what you missed, regardless of whether the 
absence was justified or not. 
 
If you miss an evaluation (e.g., exam, due date for an assignment) you may wish to seek 
academic consideration for your absence (e.g., if you believe your absence qualifies for 
medical or compassionate reasons). Please contact the course instructor as soon as possible 
if you miss an exam or a due date or if you have an ongoing personal or health issue that will 
affect your ability to meet any due date or deadline. 
 
11 
 
Any documentation provided (e.g., doctor’s notes) may be verified by different means, 
including calling the doctor’s office for confirmation. See the undergraduate calendar for 
detailed information on regulations and procedures for Academic Consideration. 
 
Policy regarding materials provided by instructor and their designates 
The material shared by the course instructor or by his designate (e.g., TA) as part of this 
course, including copies of the lecture slides, are solely for the personal use of the authorized 
student and may NOT be reproduced, or transmitted to others, whether it is in their original 
format or a modified version, without the express written consent of the course instructor. 
 
Policy on emails 
Only questions that can be answered simply, for example by yes or no or with a short 
sentence, will be answered by email. For longer answers you will most likely receive an email 
asking you to come and see me. 
 
Emails will usually be answered within 24 to 48 hours during weekdays. It is possible that 
some emails that are not from a university address (e.g., @hotmail.com) may be treated as 
spam. So do not hesitate to come and see your instructor or TA if your email was not 
answered. The university expects you to check your U of Guelph email account regularly, and 
us to use it to communicate with you. 
 
Policy regarding exam copies 
Copies of the exam are loaned to registered students for the duration of the examination only. 
They remain the property of the course instructor at all times. All copies must be returned to 
the instructor or their designate at the end of the examination time. They cannot be removed 
from the examination room under any circumstances. All material contained in the exams is 
copyrighted, and may not be reproduced, or transmitted to others, without the express written 
consent of the instructor. 
 
University Policies  
Academic Consideration 
When you find yourself unable to meet an in-course requirement because of illness or 
compassionate reasons, please advise the course instructor in writing, with your name, id#, 
and e-mail contact. See the academic calendar for information on regulations and procedures 
for Academic Consideration: 
http://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-ac.shtml 
Academic Misconduct 
The University of Guelph is committed to upholding the highest standards of academic integrity 
and it is the responsibility of all members of the University community, faculty, staff, and 
students  to be aware of what constitutes academic misconduct and to do as much as possible 
to prevent academic offences from occurring.  
University of Guelph students have the responsibility of abiding by the University's policy on 
academic misconduct regardless of their location of study; faculty, staff and students have the 
12 
 
 
 
 
Date Submitted to Chair: 
 
 
Chair Signature (Approval): 
 
 
Sandra Scott 
Date Approved by Chair: 26 August 2019 
responsibility of supporting an environment that discourages misconduct. Students need to 
remain aware that instructors have access to and the right to use electronic and other means 
of detection. Please note: Whether or not a student intended to commit academic misconduct 
is not relevant for a finding of guilt. Hurried or careless submission of assignments does not 
excuse students from responsibility for verifying the academic integrity of their work before 
submitting it. Students who are in any doubt as to whether an action on their part could be 
construed as an academic offence should consult with a faculty member or faculty advisor.  
The Academic Misconduct Policy is detailed in the Undergraduate Calendar: 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-
amisconduct.shtml  
Accessibility 
The University of Guelph is committed to creating a barrier-free environment. Providing 
services for students is a shared responsibility among students, faculty and administrators. This 
relationship is based on respect of individual rights, the dignity of the individual and the 
University community's shared commitment to an open and supportive learning environment. 
Students requiring service or accommodation, whether due to an identified, ongoing disability 
or a short-term disability should contact Student Accessibility Services as soon as possible.  
For more information, contact SAS at 519-824-4120 ext. 56208 or email sas@uoguelph.ca or 
see the website: https://wellness.uoguelph.ca/accessibility/  
Course Evaluation Information 
Please refer to the Course and Instructor Evaluation Website 
Recording of Materials  
Presentations which are made in relation to course work—including lectures—cannot be 
recorded or copied without the permission of the presenter, whether the instructor, a 
classmate or guest lecturer. Material recorded with permission is restricted to use for that 
course unless further permission is granted. 
Drop date 
The last date to drop one-semester courses, without academic penalty is November 29, 
2019.  For regulations and procedures for Dropping Courses, please see the Undergraduate 
Calendar for Policies and Procedures.  
 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-drop.shtml 
 
 
13 
 
 
 
