 
 Page 1 
 
MCS*2000 Business Communication in a Changing World 
Fall 2019 
0.5 Credits 
General Course Information 
Instructor Rob McLean 
Email mclean01@uoguelph.ca 
Office Location  MINS 259 
Consultation Hours  Monday and Wednesday, 9am – 11am 
Department/School Marketing and Consumer Studies 
Class Schedule  Tuesdays & Thursdays, 10:00am – 11:20am 
Room: JTP 2266 
Pre-requisites n/a 
Course Description 
This course provides an overview of business communication by reviewing and discussing key concepts such as 
leadership, sustainability, ethics and globalization. Weekly classes are supplemented by discussions of business 
cases and hand-in assignments designed to develop the written, verbal and non-verbal business communication 
skills required to successfully and persuasively share ideas, research, proposals, applications, and business plans. 
Course Learning Outcomes    
The learning outcomes for this course include 
1. Create, conduct and deliver efficient, informative written, verbal, and non-verbal communications in order to 
persuasively develop a targeted audience’s comprehension 
2. Anticipate audience needs and expectations and adapt behaviour to meet those needs, assessing and 
leveraging specialized vocabularies employed in specific business contexts (e.g. corporate, organizational, 
community benefit, intercultural) 
3. Apply course concepts and best practices to effectively research, plan, write and present information  
4. Cultivate professional credibility, self-awareness, situational adaptability and confidence   
5. Effectively create and implement different formats of business communication (e.g. reports, proposals, plans, 
routine messages) 
 
MCS*2000 Business Communication in a Changing World Fall 2019 
 Page 2 
Course Resources 
 
 
 
Course Assessments 
  Assignments Associated Learning Outcomes 
Due Date/ 
location 
Assessment 1: 15% 
Eleven quizzes will be 
posted on CourseLink. 
Your final grade in this 
section will be 
comprised of your 
best ten grades of the 
eleven quizzes (for a 
total weight of 15%) 
Demonstrate understanding 
of course content, 
concepts, best practices, 
and their application. A mix 
of m/c and t/f questions. 
Dates and 
quizzes on 
CourseLink 
Assessment 2: 30% 
Three independent 
submissions: Letter to 
Client (7.5%), Video 
presentation (15%), 
Group Presentation 
Critique (7.5%) 
Three assignments will 
demonstrate the creation 
and implementation of 
different formats of business 
communication. 
Various 
dates. All 
submissions 
to 
CourseLink 
Dropbox 
Assessment 3: 15% Team Presentation 
Demonstrate awareness of 
group dynamics verbal 
presentation best practices 
In-class on 
Nov 5-14 
Assessment 4: 15% Business Report (Pairs Assignment) 
Demonstrate expertise with 
applied course concepts, 
working in pairs 
Oct 31st  
Assessment 5: 25% Final Exam Demonstrate expertise with applied course concepts 
Time and 
location TBD 
     
Total 100%    
  
Required Text: Meyer, Carolyn. Communicating for Results, A 
Canadian Student’s Guide, Fourth Edition. © 2017.  ISBN-10: 
0199023042 • ISBN-13: 9780199023042 
 
Other Resources 
Additional resources will be announced in class and will be posted 
on CourseLink. 
 
 
MCS*2000 Business Communication in a Changing World Fall 2019 
 Page 3 
Course Philosophy and Approach 
Knowledge and Understanding 
 
This course will further your understanding of the role of effective business communication in an 
organization by helping you develop skills and strategies for internal and external communication. You 
will learn to communicate effectively for your own individual career success. You will learn about (and 
practice) common communication formats, including memos, letters (emails), executive summaries, 
informal and formal reports, and presentations. You will develop and implement skills and tactics that will 
enhance your professionalism, effectiveness and credibility in any workplace. 
 
Transferable Skills and Values 
 
After having taken this course, you should be able to communicate effectively through various work 
situations, understanding how the ability to change communication styles can influence a situation. You 
will gain skills that you will be able to use throughout your career in “real life” scenarios. A disciplined 
approach to class work, studying and reading during this course is fully transferrable to other courses, 
and to the business world. 
 
The course is based on an active 12-week semester. One of the most effective and efficient use of 
classroom time aims at reinforcing or clarifying what the student has tried to learn on an individual basis 
before entering the classroom. For this reason, it will be assumed that the student has carefully read the 
assigned material and made a reasonable effort to prepare notes and any questions and/or insights on 
those readings prior to the class. These materials will be discussed in class. 
 
Class Content 
 
While there is no participation grade associated with this course, attendance and participation may 
contribute greatly to your overall grade. Actively learning to communicate with peers and instructors will 
help you to achieve the learning objectives of this course. In-class content will directly apply to quizzes 
and the final exam. Students who attend and actively participate in classes have a distinct academic and 
professional advantage over those who do not. Classes will involve formative learning activities and 
opportunities that will also be subject to summative assessments. There will be very limited website 
posts regarding in-class discussions/content, so students will be expected to consult with their peers if 
they miss classes. Material discussed in class will appear on quizzes and exams so students should 
attend all scheduled classes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MCS*2000 Business Communication in a Changing World Fall 2019 
 Page 4 
Course Schedule 
Classwork Submissions & 
Assessments 
Homework 
September 5th – Course introduction   
Week One: Introduction 
Sept 10: Issues, trends, professionalism, credibility, learning 
outcomes – purpose, processes, definitions 
 • Chapter 1 
• Quiz 
 Sept 12: Demonstrated Professionalism, Writing improvement  
Week Two: The Communication Process   
Sept 17: Understanding yourself, understanding your audience  • Chapter 2 
• Quiz Sept 19: Written, verbal, non-verbal communication, Emails 
Week Three: Planning, Writing, Revising  
Sept 24: Planning for concise communication • Letter to Client 
(independent) due 
Sept 26 
• Chapter 3 
• Quiz Sept 26: Research, editing, personal brand 
Week Four: Personal communication, interviews, applications  
Oct 1: Oral communication, communicating for employment, 
interviews 
 • Chapters 10,13 
• Quiz 
Oct 3: Presentations, meetings, video conferencing 
Week Five: Business Style  
Oct 8: Using appropriate words, conciseness, grammar, 
punctuation 
 
• Chapters 4,5 
• Quiz 
Oct 10: Group Business Reports - planning 
Week Six: Reports and Proposals  
Oct 15: Fall Study Break Day • Video presentation 
(independent) due Oct 
17 
• Chapters 11,12  
• Quiz Oct 17: Informal and Formal Reports, Proposals, applications 
Week Seven: Business Communication formats  
Oct 22: Writing a Business Plan, Memos, emails, formats, 
contexts, goodwill 
 
• Chapters 6,7 
• Quiz 
Oct 24: Critique discussion, presentations & public speaking 
Week Eight: Persuasive communication  
Oct 29: Persuasion, preparation, sales, fundraising • Business Report 
(pairs) due Oct 31 
• Chapter 9 
• Quiz Oct 31: Team Presentations – planning and team work 
Week Nine: Effective unwelcome communication  
Nov 5: Group presentations; Unfavourable news • Group presentations  • Chapter 8 
• Quiz Nov 7: Group presentations; Crisis communications 
Week Ten: Intercultural Communication  
Nov 12: Group presentations; Cross-cultural communication  • Group presentations  
 
• Chapter 2 
• Quiz Nov 14: Group presentations; Cultural intelligence 
Week Eleven: Impersonal communication  
Nov 19: Online, mobile, video, content marketing, accessibility • Group Presentation 
Critique (independent)  
due Nov 19th  
• Chapter 14 
• Quiz Nov 21: Multimedia, emotional intelligence 
Week Twelve: Professionalism and credibility  
Nov 26: Course review  • All chapters 
Nov 28: Final exam review (class rescheduled from Oct. 15) 
 
                   Note: The schedule of learning activities may require modification from time to time.  Any changes will be announced in class and/or on the Courselink site. 
 
MCS*2000 Business Communication in a Changing World Fall 2019 
 Page 5 
Course Policies 
All students are expected to abide by the University’s academic regulations in the completion of their academic work, 
as set out in the undergraduate calendar (see 
http://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/index.shtml).  Some regulations are 
highlighted below: 
Academic Misconduct 
The University of Guelph is committed to upholding the highest standards of academic integrity and directs all 
members of the University community – faculty, staff and students – to be aware of what constitutes academic 
misconduct and to do as much as possible to prevent academic offences from occurring. The University of Guelph 
takes a serious view of academic misconduct and it is your responsibility as a student to be aware of and to abide by 
the University’s policy. Included in the definition of academic misconduct are such activities as cheating on 
examinations, plagiarism, misrepresentation, and submitting the same material in two different courses without 
written permission.  
To better understand your responsibilities, read the Undergraduate Calendar at: 
http://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-amisconduct.shtml You are also 
advised to make use of the resources available through the Learning Commons 
(http://www.learningcommons.uoguelph.ca/) and to discuss any questions you may have with your course 
instructor, teaching assistant, Academic Advisor or Academic Counselor. 
Students should be aware that faculty have the right to use software to aid in the detection of plagiariChapter or 
copying and to examine students orally on submitted work. For students found guilty of academic misconduct, 
serious penalties, up to and including suspension or expulsion from the University can be imposed. 
Academic Consideration 
Students who find themselves unable to meet course requirements by the deadline or criteria expected because of 
medical, psychological or compassionate circumstances beyond their control, should review the regulations on 
Academic Consideration in the Undergraduate Calendar (http://www.uoguelph.ca/undergrad_calendar/c08/c08-
ac.shtml) and discuss their situation with the instructor, Program Counsellor or Academic Advisor as appropriate. 
Religious Holidays 
Should a student need to miss scheduled tests, mid-term examinations, final examinations, or requirements to attend 
classes and participate in laboratories for religious reasons, please advise the instructor within two weeks of the 
distribution of this course outline so that alternate arrangements can be made. For further information see 
http://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-accomrelig.shtml 
  
MCS*2000 Business Communication in a Changing World Fall 2019 
 Page 6 
University Grading Scheme 
This course follows the University grading scheme outlined in the University Calendar: 
A+ 90-100% Excellent:  An outstanding performance in which the student demonstrates a superior grasp of 
the subject matter, and an ability to go beyond the given material in a critical and constructive 
manner. The student demonstrates a high degree of creative and/or logical thinking, a superior 
ability to organize, to analyze, and to integrate ideas, and a thorough familiarity with the 
appropriate literature and techniques. 
A 85-89 
A- 80-84 
B+ 77-79 Good: A more than adequate performance in which the student demonstrates a thorough grasp of 
the subject matter, and an ability to organize and examine the material in a critical and 
constructive manner. The student demonstrates a good understanding of the relevant issues and 
a familiarity with the appropriate literature and techniques. 
B 73-76 
B- 70-72 
C+ 67-69 Acceptable: An adequate performance in which the student demonstrates a generally adequate 
grasp of the subject matter and a moderate ability to examine the material in a critical and 
constructive manner. The student displays an adequate understanding of the relevant issues, and 
a general familiarity with the appropriate literature and techniques. 
C 63-66 
C- 60-62 
D+ 57-59 Minimally acceptable: A barely adequate performance in which the student demonstrates a 
familiarity with the subject matter, but whose attempts to examine the material in a critical and 
constructive manner are only partially successful. The student displays some understanding of the 
relevant issues, and some familiarity with the appropriate literature and techniques. 
D 53-56 
D- 50-52 
F 0-49 Fail: An inadequate performance. 
 
  
MCS*2000 Business Communication in a Changing World Fall 2019 
 Page 7 
Code of Conduct – The Top Ten 
As a student in the Department of Marketing and Consumer Studies, College of Management and Economics at the 
University of Guelph, you are a member of a scholarly community committed to improving the effectiveness of people 
and organizations, and the societies in which they reside, through groundbreaking and engaging scholarship and 
pedagogy.  We seek to promote a comprehensive, critical and strategic understanding of organizations, including the 
complex interrelationship between leadership, systems (financial and human) and the broader social and political 
context.  And, we prepare graduates for leadership roles in which organizational objectives, self-awareness, social 
responsibility and sustainability are primary considerations. 
In keeping with this commitment, we expect all of our students (indeed – all members of our community) to act in a 
professional and respectful manner to fellow students, staff and faculty, as well as to members of the broader 
university and local community.   This expectation is very much in keeping with your preparation for a professional 
career. 
The following conduct is expected of all of our students: 
1. Come to class prepared to learn and actively participate (having completed assigned readings, learning activities 
etc.). 
2. Approach your academic work with integrity (avoid all forms of academic misconduct).  
3. Arrive on time and stay for the entire class.  If you happen to be late, enter the classroom as quietly as possible.  
At the end of class, apologize to the faculty member for the interruption.  If you have to leave class early, alert 
the faculty member in advance. 
4. If you know in advance that you are going to miss a class, send an email to the faculty member letting him/her 
know that you will be absent, with a brief explanation. 
5. While in class, refrain from using any written material (e.g., newspaper) or technology (e.g., the Internet, 
computer games, cell phone) that is not relevant to the learning activities of that class.  Turn off your cell phone 
at the start of each class. 
6. Listen attentively and respectfully to the points of view of your peers and the faculty member. Don’t talk while 
others have the floor. 
7. Raise your hand when you wish to contribute and wait to be called upon.  Challenge others appropriately, 
drawing on reason and research rather than unsubstantiated opinion, anecdote and/or emotion.  Keep an open 
mind and be prepared to have your point of view challenged. 
8. When sending emails to faculty, apply principles of business writing; use a professional and respectful style (use 
a formal salutation, check for spelling and grammatical errors, and avoid slang and colloquial short forms). 
9. When making a presentation, wear business dress. 
10. Provide thoughtful feedback at the completion of all courses (we are committed to continuous improvement but 
need your input to help us decide what to focus on).      
