 
MGMT*3020*01 Corporate Social Responsibility 
Winter 2019 
0.5 credit weight 
 
General Course Information 
Instructor: Ruben Burga, PhD, MBA, BASc., P.Eng. 
Email: rburga@uoguelph.ca 
Office Location: MAC220 (MacDonald Hall); 519-824-4120 x54463 
Office Hours: By appointment 
Department/School: Management 
Class Schedule: Wednesday, 7:00pm – 9:50pm, Rozanski (ROZH) Rm. 101 
Pre-requisites: 9 credits 
Co-requisites: N/A 
Course Description 
This course provides students an opportunity to examine a comprehensive range of topics and issues 
related to business and sustainability and aims to explore the implications of changing stakeholder 
expectations, and opportunities for organizational sustainable value creation.  Key topics will include CSR 
theories and frameworks, global issues and role of business in society, socially responsible investing, green 
consumption, CSR and firm competitive advantage, reputation, corporate governance and ethics, regulation 
and social/environmental reporting. 
Course Learning Outcomes (LO) 
Upon successful completion of this course, you will be able to: 
1. Assess complex issues and judgments based on established principles and techniques within the 
strategic management field; 
2. Analyse corporate social responsibility (CSR) in relation to innovation; 
3. Analyse corporate social responsibility (CSR) in relation to Bottom of Pyramid (BOP) market 
development; 
4. Support a sustained argument in written form while communicating managerial ideas, issues, and 
conclusions; 
5. Analyse corporate social responsibility (CSR) in relation to performance management and 
governance; 
6. Analyse corporate social responsibility (CSR) in relation to investment; 
7. Demonstrate competence in the research process by applying CSR knowledge in the critical analysis 
of a specific case; 
8. Analyse corporate social responsibility (CSR) in relation to strategy and implementation; 
9. Demonstrate employability skills by participating in decision making, exercising ethical behaviour, 
and contributing to the group process. 
 
 
Indicative Content 
Week Date Topic Readings (to be read for that week) – additional readings may be assigned 
In Class 
Activities and 
Reminders* 
1 Jan. 9 Introduction to CSR  
Unit 1: Introduction – 
Part 1. What is CSR? 
Introduction to course, assignments, 
expectations, etc. 
Chandler (2017):  
Chapter 1 - What is CSR,  
Chapter 2 – The Driving Forces of 
CSR 
Set up teams and 
team contracts for 
Group Ass. #2. 
2 Jan. 16 Unit 1: Introduction –  
Part 2. A Global View of 
CSR 
Chandler (2017):  
Chapter 3 – Corporate Rights and 
Responsibilities 
Haertle et al. (2017). PRME: Building a 
global movement on responsible 
management education. International 
Journal of Management Education, 15(20, 
66-72. 
Calton et al. (2013). Building partnerships to 
create social and economic value at the 
Base of the Global Development Pyramid. 
Journal of Business Ethics, 117(4), 721-733. 
Group Contracts are 
due & CORE 
certificates are due 
 
3 Jan. 23 Unit 2: A Stakeholder 
Perspective of 
Corporate Strategy. Part 
1. Understanding 
Stakeholders 
Chandler (2017):  
Chapter 4 – Stakeholder Theory, 
Chapter 5: Corporate Stakeholder 
Responsibility 
 
4 Jan. 30 Unit 2: A Stakeholder 
Perspective of 
Corporate Strategy. Part 
2. Stakeholder 
Perspective and Profit 
Chandler (2017):  
Chapter 7 – The Pursuit of Profit 
Houston (2017) For Goodness Sake (read 
pp. 10-65)  
 
5 Feb. 6 Unit 3: CSR – An 
Economic Perspective. 
Part 1. Viewing CSR 
through an 
Accountability Lens 
Chandler (2017):  
Chapter 9 - Accountability,  
Waddock (2008). Building a new institutional 
infrastructure for corporate responsibility. 
Academy of Management Perspectives, 
22(3). 87-108. 
Ass. #2 Aim2Flourish 
Assignment – Group 
- Phase 1 (15%)  
 
6 Feb. 13 Unit 3: CSR – An 
Economic Perspective. 
Part 2. Viewing CSR 
through a Sustainability 
Lens 
Chandler (2017):  
Chapter 13 - Sustainability 
Houston (2017) For Goodness Sake (read 
pp. 66 - 101) 
 
7 Feb. 27 Unit 4: CSR as a 
Constraint. Part 1. 
Corporate Strategy and 
CSR Constraints 
Chandler (2017):  
Chapter 10 – Strategy + CSR, 
Chapter 11 – CSR as a Strategic 
Filter 
Ass. #2 – Group - 
Phase 2 (15%)  
 
8 Mar. 6 
Note that 
the 40th 
day is 
Mar. 8   
 
Unit 4: CSR as a 
Constraint. Part 2. A 
Strategic CSR 
Perspective 
Chandler (2017):  
Chapter 12 – Strategic CSR 
Kurucz, Colbert, & Wheeler (2013): 
Chapter 3 – Learning our way 
forward 
Husted, B. W. (2003). Governance choices 
for corporate social responsibility: to 
contribute, collaborate or internalize? Long 
Range Planning, 36(5), 481-498. 
 
 
9 Mar. 13 
 
Unit 5: Implementing 
CSR. Part 1. Strategic 
CSR Decision-making 
Chandler (2017):  
Chapter 14 – Implementing CSR 
Chapter 15 – Sustainable Value 
Creation  
 
 
10 Mar. 20 Unit 5: Implementing 
CSR. Part 2. 
Sustainable Value 
Creation 
Surroca, Tribo, & Waddock (2010). 
Corporate responsibility and financial 
performance: the role of intangible 
resources. Strategic Management Journal, 
31, 436-490. 
Ass, #2 Group -
Phase 3 (15%)  
 
11 Mar. 27 Unit 6: Integrating CSR. 
Part 1. Managing 
Sustainability  
Simons, R. (1994). How new top managers 
use control systems as levers of strategic 
renewal. Strategic management journal, 
15(3), 169-189. 
Arjalies, D., & Mundy, J. (2013). The use of 
management control systems to manage 
CSR strategy: A levers of control 
perspective. Management Accounting 
Research (24), 284-300. 
Ass. #3 Individual 
Reflection (15%) 
12 Apr. 3 Unit 6: Integrating CSR. 
Part 2. A Sustainability 
Mindset 
 Rimanoczy (2014). A matter of being: 
Developing sustainability-minded leaders. 
Journal of Management for Global 
Sustainability, 2(1), 95-122. 
 
Ass. #4 – Individual 
Essay (16%) 
 
 
 
Course Assessment 
Assessment Weight Description 
Associated 
Learning 
Outcomes Due Date/ location 
Assessment 1: 24% 
Learning Reflections 
(Course reflections 
marked weekly - 2% x 
12) 
LO 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 
8 
Weekly by Friday 11:59 p.m. 
- Dropbox 
Assessment 2: 45%  Phase 1: Aim2Flourish 
Innovation Project 
(Group) (15%) 
Phase 2: CSR Analysis 
of Aim2Flourish Client 
(Group) (15%) 
LO 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 
8, 9 
CORE Cert. – Jan. 16 
Group Contract – Jan. 16 
Phase 1 – Feb. 6 
Phase 2 – Feb. 27 
Phase 3 – Mar. 20 
Phase 3: CSR 
Recommendations for 
Aim2Flourish Client 
(Group) (15%)  
Assessment 3: 15% Aim2Flourish Case Individual Case 
Reflection (15%) LO 1, 4, 7 Mar. 27 
Assessment 4 16% Individual Essay (16%) LO 1, 3, 4, 8 Apr. 3 
Total  100%    
 
 
    
Teaching and Learning Practices (as appropriate) 
Lectures: Our approach is to create a learning environment through the use of cases, 
discussions, and experiential activities, where students can interact with the instructor, 
each other, and course material to explore and discuss management and 
organizational related issues to generate ideas and solutions both in class and on the 
course website.  We believe that learning occurs when there is value creation and 
when exploration into the course concepts and ideas generate the need to ask 
questions and challenge assumptions.  We expect students to engage in the learning 
and discuss topics and issues through critical analysis and use multiple perspectives 
in the exploration of the course concepts.  To enhance learning and application, 
students are expected to go beyond the course material and integrate knowledge from 
events in the media and other related and relevant resources. 
 
  
 
Course Resources 
This course uses a variety of materials and resources.  One of your primary resources will be the course 
website (http://courselink.uoguelph.ca). All announcements, links to required and recommended readings, 
information on activities and exercises, assignments, and updates will be posted here.  You will also be able 
to access any handouts you may have missed through this site.  Check this site often. 
 
On-Line Communication: 
 This course has a website (see http://courselink.uoguelph.ca/).  Please post any questions you may 
have on this website.  Please use this website to communicate with the course learning community 
outside the classroom. 
 I will be communicating with you via your central email account <mail.uoguelph.ca> from time to time.  
You are required to check this account on a regular basis.  Please be advised that I will not edit my 
mailing list to your hotmail/yahoo etc. account. 
 While I endeavour to check my email daily, students can reasonably expect a response from me 
within 48/72 hours business hours under normal circumstances. 
 Please note that in-class reflections will be done for every class.  Students may be asked to discuss 
the reflective question in-class.  They will submit their answers into the appropriate Dropbox folder. 
Required Texts: 
Strategic Corporate Social Responsibility, 4th Edition  
Author:  David Chandler 
Publisher:  Sage Publications, Inc. 
ISBN:  978-1-5063-1099-2 
 
For Goodness’ Sake; Satisfy the hunger for meaningful business 
Authors: Chris Houston with Jordan Pinches 
Available through the University of Guelph book stores or from www.telosity.net/for_goodness_sake or at 
https://aerbook.com/store/Telosity 
 
Required Readings: All readings are required to be done prior to class. Additional readings may be added 
throughout the semester 
Articles as may be described throughout the course are available through the Guelph 
Library. You may be required to access some readings on websites as indicated on 
the course schedule. 
Recommended Texts: 
In addition to the required readings, supplementary readings have been identified to assist you in your 
coursework.  These items will also be available at the University of Guelph Library. 
 
The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid: Eradicating Poverty Through Profits 
Revised and Updated 5th Anniversary Edition, 
Author: C.K. Prahalad 
Publisher: Wharton School Publishing, Pearson Education Inc. 
ISBN 0-13-382913-8 
 
Reconstructing Value: Leadership Skills for a Sustainable World  
Authors: Elizabeth Kurucz, Barry Colbert, David Wheeler  
Publisher: University of Toronto Free Press 
ISBN:1-4426-1153-5 
 
Course Policies 
In this course, much of your time will be spent in group interaction.  This enables you to share ideas 
and to improve communication skills. Through interaction, you will discover for yourself the meaning 
of concepts, the subtleties inherent in everyday business situations, and the rationales for various 
solutions to managerial problems. To achieve effective interaction, I have three expectations: 
 
1. Attendance.  Because interaction is central, and also because your group members will be 
relying on you for ideas, I expect you to attend every class. Valid reasons for absence include 
serious illness and family emergencies. Studying for exams and completing assignments are 
not valid reasons to miss class. 
 
2. Preparation.  You are expected to read assigned material in advance and to be fully 
prepared for class discussion. You may be called upon to begin the class and to contribute to 
discussion at any time.  Unsupported opinion will not substitute for informed discussion.  
Adequate preparation is the only way to avoid embarrassment. 
 
3. Group work.  You will participate in group work during the term.  The group should address 
group problems or conflict in a timely fashion. You will have signed a group contract that 
should govern most conflicts that you experience. I am available to assist groups who 
experience problems. 
 
 
Grading Policies 
http://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-grds.shtml 
Course Policy on Group Work: 
You will organize into groups in Week 1. This will be your group for your discussions, assignments, and 
projects. It is essential that students ensure the groups remain cohesive and supportive if effective learning 
is to occur. Groups will be required to sign and submit a contract signed by all members committing to 
agreed-upon group norms by the start of class in Week 2. In the event of misunderstandings, the first course 
of action is to attempt to resolve these within the group. If this is not possible, it is the responsibility of the 
student(s) to raise these issues with the Instructor. The default position is that all students in a group will 
receive the same grade for group-based work. If there is a situation where a student is not fairly contributing 
to the production and completion of the group assignment and does not respond to group requests to 
enhance her or his efforts, the other group members should contact the Instructor. In special cases such as 
this, a process will be instituted to enable group members to each assess a fair allocation of marks for the 
work completed. This assessment may result in group members receiving different grades for the same 
assignment. Such instances in this course are extremely rare and the expectation is that all group members 
will direct their efforts toward proactively resolving internal issues working in groups, using their group 
contract as a basis for establishing expectations and resolving conflicts. 
Course Policy regarding use of Electronic Devices and recording of lectures: 
Electronic recording of classes is expressly forbidden without consent of the instructor.  When recordings are 
permitted they are solely for the use of the authorized student and may not be reproduced, or transmitted to 
others, without the express written consent of the instructor. 
 
University Policies 
Academic Consideration 
When you find yourself unable to meet an in-course requirement because of illness or compassionate reasons, 
please advise the course instructor in writing, with your name, id#, and e-mail contact. See the academic 
calendar for information on regulations and procedures for  
Academic Consideration: http://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/.calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-
ac.shtml 
Academic Misconduct 
The University of Guelph is committed to upholding the highest standards of academic integrity and it is the 
responsibility of all members of the University community, faculty, staff, and students to be aware of what 
constitutes academic misconduct and to do as much as possible to prevent academic offences from occurring. 
University of Guelph students have the responsibility of abiding by the University's policy on academic 
misconduct regardless of their location of study; faculty, staff and students have the responsibility of supporting 
an environment that discourages misconduct. Students need to remain aware that instructors have access to 
and the right to use electronic and other means of detection. Please note: Whether or not a student intended 
to commit academic misconduct is not relevant for a finding of guilt. Hurried or careless submission of 
assignments does not excuse students from responsibility for verifying the academic integrity of their work 
before submitting it. Students who are in any doubt as to whether an action on their part could be construed 
as an academic offence should consult with a faculty member or faculty advisor. 
The Academic Misconduct Policy is detailed in the Undergraduate Calendar: 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-amisconduct.shtml 
Accessibility 
The University of Guelph is committed to creating a barrier-free environment. Providing services for students 
is a shared responsibility among students, faculty and administrators. This relationship is based on respect of 
individual rights, the dignity of the individual and the University community's shared commitment to an open 
and supportive learning environment. Students requiring service or accommodation, whether due to an 
identified, ongoing disability or a short-term disability should contact Student Accessibility Services as soon 
as possible. 
For more information, contact SAS at 519-824-4120 ext. 56208 or email accessibility@uoguelph.ca or see the 
website: http://www.csd.uoguelph.ca/csd/ 
Course Evaluation Information 
Please refer to the Course and Instructor Evaluation Website 
Drop Date 
The last date to drop one-semester courses, without academic penalty, is November 2nd, 2018. For regulations 
and procedures for Dropping Courses, see the Academic Calendar: 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-drop.shtml 
 
