 
MCS*2100 Personal Financial Management 
Fall 2019 
Section: DE01 
Department of Marketing and Consumer Studies 
Credit Weight: 0.50 
Course Details 
Calendar Description 
This introductory course is designed to help students develop and achieve their 
personal goals in financial management. 
Pre-Requisite(s): 5.00 credits 
Co-Requisite(s): None 
Equate(s): COST*1200 
Restriction(s): None 
Method of Delivery: Online  
Final Exam 
Date: December 12, 2019 
Time: 08:30AM - 10:30AM 
Location: On campus  
Page 2 of 20 
Instructional Support 
Instructor 
Sumit Bose MBA CFP FMA FCSI CIWM 
Email: sbose@uoguelph.ca 
Sumit Bose has over 24 years of professional experience in the Financial Services area. 
His experience includes working as an Analyst with William M. Mercer Ltd. - Canada's 
leading pension consulting firm as well as working in a specialized unit of Estate, 
Business and Investment Planning at the Royal Bank. He currently has his own 
professional practice working in the areas of Financial & Estate Planning, Retirement 
Planning, Business Planning and Succession Planning since 1998 
 
Sumit Bose has been an instructor with the DeGroote School of Business McMaster 
University teaching Personal Financial Management, Risk Management and Insurance, 
Ethics, and Financial Planning and Advising to fourth-year graduate and MBA students 
since 2010. He has also taught Personal Financial Management at the University of 
Guelph 
 
LinkedIn Profile: https://www.linkedin.com/in/sumit-bose/ 
Teaching Assistant(s) 
Name: TBA 
Email: TBA 
Learning Resources  
Required Textbook 
Title: Personal Finance 
Author(s): Jack Kapoor, Les Dlabay, Robert J. Hughes, Lewis Stevenson, Ernest 
Kerst, Arshad Ahmad, & Jordan Fortino 
Edition / Year: 7th Canadian edition, 2018  
Publisher: McGraw-Hill Education Canada 
ISBN: 9781259650659 (print?)  
Note: Both the print and e-text versions of the textbook is acceptable for use in this 
course. 
You may purchase the textbook at the Guelph Campus Co-op Bookstore or the 
University of Guelph Bookstore. Please note that DE textbooks are located in the 
Distance Education section of the University of Guelph Bookstore. 
Page 3 of 20 
https://guelphcampus.coop/bookstore 
http://www.bookstore.uoguelph.ca/ 
Supplementary Resource 
Title: Connect Publishers Access Code 
Publisher: McGraw-Hill Education 
Note: Connect is an optional McGraw-Hill resource that comes with the 7th edition of 
the textbook. This gives you access to practice quizzes, PowerPoint presentations, 
flashcards, videos, YouTube videos, web links, an eBook and an audio glossary. These 
are additional resources that some students may find helpful in learning the material 
and in checking for understanding. None of these resources are needed to successfully 
complete the course. 
You may purchase the textbook at the Guelph Campus Co-op Bookstore or the 
University of Guelph Bookstore. Please note that DE textbooks are located in the 
Distance Education section of the University of Guelph Bookstore. 
https://guelphcampus.coop/bookstore 
http://www.bookstore.uoguelph.ca/ 
Calculator 
A calculator with the ability to perform yx calculations. A financial calculator is helpful but 
not required. All calculations can be done using a basic scientific calculator. 
Course Website 
CourseLink (powered by D2L’s Brightspace) is the course website and will act as your 
classroom. It is recommended that you log in to your course website every day to check 
for announcements, access course materials, and review the weekly schedule and 
assignment requirements.  
https://courselink.uoguelph.ca 
Ares 
For this course, you will be required to access course reserve materials through the 
University of Guelph McLaughlin Library. To access these items, select Ares on the 
navbar in CourseLink. Note that you will need your Central Login ID and password in 
order to access items on reserve.  
For further instructions on accessing reserve resources, visit How to Get Course 
Reserve Materials. 
If at any point during the course you have difficulty accessing reserve materials, please 
contact the e-Learning Operations and Reserve Services staff at: 
Page 4 of 20 
Tel: 519-824-4120 ext. 53621 
Email: libres2@uoguelph.ca 
Location: McLaughlin Library, First Floor, University of Guelph 
http://www.lib.uoguelph.ca/find/find-type-resource/course-reserves-ares/how-get-
course-reserve-material 
Learning Outcomes 
Course Learning Outcomes 
Students who take the course enjoy the practical applications that the course presents. 
Many students take this course to meet their own personal needs now and in the future. 
The financial services and products available to the public are getting more and more 
complex. It is thus important for all consumers, including you, to have a working 
knowledge of how to deal with their finances. As well, you will be able to use the skills 
and knowledge gained from this course in your future careers. 
The students taking this course come from a wide variety of backgrounds. Some of you 
have very little knowledge about personal finance while others have extensive 
backgrounds from the business perspective. In order to meet the needs of all students 
the course will cover only the basics. 
Personal Financial Management is an introductory course designed to meet the 
professional needs of those in teaching, counseling and community services, as well as 
personal goals in financial management. 
The objective of this course is to provide students with the financial literacy skills 
necessary to manage personal financial issues over their lifetime. Students will learn the 
fundamental principles of financial decision-making; and how these principles are 
applied to personal financial planning. Topics to be covered include financial goal 
setting, budgeting, tax planning, money management, consumer credit, investment, 
insurance, retirement and estate planning. 
By the end of this course, you should be able to: 
1. Assess personal financial situations, prepare relevant financial statements and 
set meaningful financial goals; 
2. Manage consumer credit, use the financial system to tap into credit sources for 
housing and other major expenditures; 
3. Avoid consumer credit traps and apply strategies for paying off debts as fast as 
possible; 
4. Identify insurance needs and manage personal risks with the appropriate choice 
of insurance and other mechanisms; 
5. Describe how financial markets and financial securities work and make 
appropriate selections of savings vehicles, stocks, bonds, and mutual funds; 
Page 5 of 20 
6. Create a plan to achieve a desirable post-retirement lifestyle; 
7. Use estate planning to meet the needs of dependents and to insure the orderly 
transfer of assets; and 
8. Demonstrate the ability to apply basic calculations for personal financial and 
investment analysis. 
Teaching and Learning Activities 
Course Structure 
This course is organized into nine units: 
• Unit 01: Personal Financial Planning 
• Unit 02: Income Tax Strategies 
• Unit 03: Banking Services of Financial Institutions 
• Unit 04: Consumer Credit 
• Unit 05: Finances of Housing 
• Unit 06: Insurance 
• Unit 07: Investing 
• Unit 08: Retirement 
• Unit 09: Estate Planning 
Schedule 
Unit 01: Personal Financial Planning 
Weeks 1 & 2 – Thursday, September 5 to Sunday, September 22 
Readings 
• Website: Unit 01 Content 
• Textbook: Chapters 1, 2, and Appendix 1B 
Activities 
• Familiarize yourself with the course website by reviewing the Start Here section 
of the course. 
• Review the Outline and Assessments sections on the course website to learn 
about course expectations, assessments, and due dates. 
• Introduce yourself to your group in the Introductions Discussion. 
Page 6 of 20 
• Complete Activities 1-7 within the Unit 01 content. 
Assessments 
• Quiz 1 
Opens: Sunday, September 22 at 12:00 am ET 
Closes: Tuesday, September 24 at 11:59 pm ET 
• Begin working on Financial Planning Assignment 
Due: Saturday, September 28 at 11:59 pm ET 
Unit 02: Income Tax Strategies 
Week 3 – Monday, September 23 to Sunday, September 29 
Readings 
• Website: Unit 02 Content 
• Textbook: Chapter 3 
Activities 
• Complete Activities 1-3 within the Unit 02 content. 
Assessments 
• Quiz 1 
Opens: Sunday, September 22 at 12:00 am ET 
Closes: Tuesday, September 24 at 11:59 pm ET 
• Submit Financial Planning Assignment 
Due: Saturday, September 28 at 11:59 pm ET 
• Quiz 2 
Opens: Sunday, September 29 at 12:00 am ET 
Closes: Tuesday, October 1 at 11:59 pm ET 
Unit 03: Banking Services of Financial Institutions 
Week 4 – Monday, September 30 to Sunday, October 6 
Readings 
• Website: Unit 03 Content 
• Textbook: Chapter 4 
Activities 
• Complete the Activities 1-3 within the Unit 03 content. 
Assessments 
Page 7 of 20 
• Quiz 2 
Opens: Sunday, September 29 at 12:00 am ET 
Closes: Tuesday, October 1 at 11:59 pm ET 
• Income Tax Assignment 
Opens: Wednesday, October 2 at 12:00 am ET 
Closes: Saturday, October 5 at 11:59 pm ET 
• Discussion 1 (Part 1) 
Opens: Saturday, October 5 at 12:00 am ET 
Closes: Monday, October 7 at 11:59 pm ET 
Unit 04: Consumer Credit 
Week 5 – Monday, October 7 to Sunday, October 13 
Readings 
• Website: Unit 04 Content 
• Textbook: Chapters 5 and 6 
Activities 
• Complete the Activities 1-4 within the Unit 04 content. 
Assessments 
• Discussion 1 (Part 1) 
Opens: Saturday, October 5 at 12:00 am ET 
Closes: Monday, October 7 at 11:59 pm ET 
• Discussion 1 (Part 2) 
Opens: Wednesday, October 9 at 12:00 am ET 
Closes: Friday, October 11 at 11:59 pm ET 
• Discussion 1 (Part 3) 
Opens: Sunday, October 13 at 12:00 am ET 
Closes: Tuesday, October 15 at 11:59 pm ET 
Unit 05: Finances of Housing 
Week 6 – Monday, October 14 to Sunday, October 20 
Readings 
• Website: Unit 05 Content 
• Textbook: Chapter 7 
Activities 
• Complete the Activities 1-2 within the Unit 05 content. 
Page 8 of 20 
Assessments 
• Discussion 1 (Part 3) 
Opens: Sunday, October 13 at 12:00 am ET 
Closes: Tuesday, October 15 at 11:59 pm ET 
• Peer Evaluation Discussion 1 
Opens: Thursday, October 17 at 9:00 am ET 
Closes: Saturday, October 19 at 11:59 pm ET 
• Quiz 3 
Opens: Sunday, October 20 at 12:00 am ET 
Closes: Tuesday, October 22 at 11:59 pm ET 
Unit 06: Insurance 
Week 7 and 8 – Monday, October 21 to Sunday, November 3 
Readings 
• Website: Unit 06 Content 
• Textbook: Chapter 8 and 9 
Activities 
• Complete the Activities 1-2 within the Unit 06 content. 
Assessments 
• Case Study Assignment 
Due: Saturday, October 26 at 11:59 pm ET 
• Discussion 2 (Question 1) 
Opens: Saturday, November 2 at 12:00 am ET 
Closes: Monday, November 4 at 11:59 pm ET 
• Quiz 4 
Opens: Sunday, November 3 at 12:00 am ET 
Closes: Tuesday, November 5 at 11:59 pm ET 
Unit 07: Investing 
Weeks 9 and 10 – Monday, November 4 to Sunday, November 17 
Readings 
• Website: Unit 07 Content 
• Textbook: Chapters 10, 11, 12, and 13 
Activities 
Page 9 of 20 
• Complete the Activities 1-2 within the Unit 07 – Week 9 content. 
• Complete the Activities 1-7 within the Unit 07 – Week 10 content. 
Assessments 
• Discussion 2 (Question 2a, 2b, and 2c) 
Opens: Wednesday, November 6 at 12:00 am ET 
Closes: Friday, November 8 at 11:59 pm ET 
• Discussion 2 (Group Answer) 
Due: Monday, November 11 at 11:59 pm ET 
• Peer Evaluation Discussion 2 
Opens: Tuesday, November 12 at 9:00 am ET 
Closes: Thursday, November 14 at 11:59 pm ET 
• Discussion 3 (Question 1) 
Opens: Saturday, November 16 at 12:00 am ET 
Closes: Monday, November 18 at 11:59 pm ET 
• Quiz 5 
Opens: Sunday, November 17 at 12:00 am ET 
Closes: Tuesday, November 19 at 11:59 pm ET 
Unit 08: Retirement 
Week 11 – Monday, November 18 to Sunday, November 24 
Readings 
• Website: Unit 08 Content 
• Textbook: Chapter 14 
Activities 
• Complete the Activities 1-2 within the Unit 08 content. 
Assessments 
• Discussion 3 (Question 1) 
Opens: Saturday, November 16 at 12:00 am ET 
Closes: Monday, November 18 at 11:59 pm ET 
• Discussion 3 (Question 2a, 2b, and 2c) 
Opens: Tuesday, November 19 at 12:00 am ET 
Closes: Thursday, November 21 at 11:59 pm ET 
• Discussion 3 (Group Answer) 
Due: Sunday, November 24 at 11:59 pm ET 
Page 10 of 20 
Unit 09: Estate Planning 
Week 12 – Monday, November 25 to Friday, November 29 
Readings 
• Website: Unit 09 Content 
• Textbook: Chapter 15 
Activities 
• Complete the Activities 1-2 within the Unit 09 content. 
Assessments 
• Peer Evaluation Discussion 3 
Opens: Monday, November 25 at 9:00 am ET 
Closes: Wednesday, November 27 at 11:59 pm ET 
• Discussion 4 
Opens: Tuesday, November 26 at 12:00 am ET 
Closes: Thursday, November 28 at 11:59 pm ET 
• Quiz 6 
Opens: Wednesday, November 27 at 12:00 am ET 
Closes: Friday, November 29 at 11:59 pm ET 
• Peer Evaluation Discussion 4 
Opens: Thursday, November 28 at 9:00 am ET 
Closes: Friday, November 29 at 11:59 pm ET 
Assessment 
The grade determination for this course is indicated in the following table. A brief 
description of each assessment is provided below. Select Content on the navbar to 
locate Assessments in the table of contents panel to review further details of each 
assessment. Due dates can be found under the Schedule heading of this outline. 
Table 1: Course Assessment 
Assessment Item Weight 
Participation in Discussions 16% 
Financial Planning Assignment 10% 
Income Tax Assignment 4% 
Page 11 of 20 
Assessment Item Weight 
Case Study 10% 
Quizzes 20% 
Final Exam 40% 
Total 100% 
Assessment Descriptions 
Participation in Discussions 
Across the course units, there are discussion activities that require your active 
participate in the group discussions. It is expected that the textbook readings and other 
relevant literature will help to inform your contributions to the group discussions and that 
you will thus refer to the textbook at least once in each post. All in-text citations and 
references must be provided in APA format. When posting, remember that you are 
expected to conduct yourself in a professional manner and be respectful of your peers; 
thus, dishing out personal insults is unacceptable. Each post must be organized, 
thoughtful, free of grammar and spelling errors. 
Financial Planning Assignment 
This assignment requires you to fill out the Personal Financial Planning Worksheets 
which you will use to answer a set of questions regarding your worksheets.   
Income Tax Assignment 
This case assignment requires you to fill out the tax forms for an individual. Once your 
are confident that you have completed the forms you will complete a quiz asking for 
your results for certain line numbers on the income tax forms. 
Case Study 
The case study assignment requires you to examine current mortgage rates, decide on 
the appropriate type of mortgage for a family, do mortgage calculations and make 
recommendations. 
Quizzes 
There are 6 quizzes covering all units in this course. You are given one attempt for each 
quiz, which will be available for three days. 
Final Exam 
Page 12 of 20 
This course requires you to write a traditional sit-down final exam. Final exams are 
written on campus at the University of Guelph or at alternate locations for students at a 
distance. The final exam will cover all assigned course material and will consist of 115 
multiple-choice questions with four answer options per question. In order to pass the 
course, you must pass the final exam. If you fail the course due to an exam grade less 
than 50% you will receive a final grade of 49%. 
It is assumed that all DE students will be writing their final examination on campus at 
the University of Guelph. University of Guelph degree and associate diploma students 
must check WebAdvisor for their examination schedule. Open Learning program 
students must check the Open Learning Program Final Examination Schedule for their 
examination schedule. 
If you are studying at a distance, you can request to write your final exam at an 
alternate location. It is recommended that you make arrangements as early as possible 
in the semester since changes cannot be guaranteed after the deadline. Exam 
schedules for off-campus exams will be emailed by Week 9 of the course. For more 
information, please visit Final Exams. 
https://webadvisor.uoguelph.ca 
http://opened.uoguelph.ca/student-resources/Open-Learning-Program-Final-Exam-
Schedule 
http://opened.uoguelph.ca/student-resources/final-exams 
Course Technologies and Technical Support 
CourseLink System Requirements 
You are responsible for ensuring that your computer system meets the necessary 
system requirements. Use the browser check tool to ensure your browser settings are 
compatible and up to date. (Results will be displayed in a new browser window). 
http://spaces.uoguelph.ca/ed/system-requirements/ 
https://courselink.uoguelph.ca/d2l/systemCheck 
Technical Skills 
As part of your online experience, you are expected to use a variety of technology as 
part of your learning: 
• Manage files and folders on your computer (e.g., save, name, copy, backup, 
rename, delete, and check properties); 
• Install software, security, and virus protection; 
• Use office applications (e.g., Word, PowerPoint, Excel, or similar) to create 
documents; 
Page 13 of 20 
• Be comfortable uploading and downloading saved files; 
• Communicate using email (e.g., create, receive, reply, print, send, download, and 
open attachments); 
• Navigate the CourseLink learning environment and use the essential tools, such 
as Dropbox, Quizzes, Discussions, and Grades (the instructions for this are 
given in your course); 
• Access, navigate, and search the Internet using a web browser (e.g., Firefox, 
Internet Explorer); and 
• Perform online research using various search engines (e.g., Google) and library 
databases. 
Course Technologies 
Ares 
The library’s Ares Course Reserve system is a software solution that provides you with 
access to digital resources used in your course. The system also provides information 
on print resources placed at the physical reserve desk at the library. Accessibility and 
privacy policy statements do not exist for this software. 
CourseLink 
Distance Education courses are offered entirely online using CourseLink (powered by 
D2L's Brightspace), the University of Guelph's online learning management system 
(LMS). By using this service, you agree to comply with the University of Guelph's 
Access and Privacy Guidelines. Please visit the D2L website to review the Brightspace 
privacy statement and Brightspace Learning Environment web accessibility standards. 
http://www.uoguelph.ca/web/privacy/ 
https://www.d2l.com/legal/privacy/ 
https://www.d2l.com/accessibility/standards/ 
McGraw-Hill Connect 
This course will use McGraw-Hill Connect for as a supplementary resource. Connect is 
a digital learning environment administered by McGraw-Hill Education. To learn more 
about Connect’s accessibility policy and Connect’s privacy policy, please visit the 
McGraw-Hill Education website. 
http://www.mheducation.com/about/accessibility.html 
http://www.mheducation.com/privacy.html 
Technical Support 
If you need any assistance with the software tools or the CourseLink website, contact 
CourseLink Support. 
Page 14 of 20 
CourseLink Support 
University of Guelph 
Day Hall, Room 211 
Email: courselink@uoguelph.ca 
Tel: 519-824-4120 ext. 56939 
Toll-Free (CAN/USA): 1-866-275-1478 
Walk-In Hours (Eastern Time): 
Monday thru Friday: 8:30 am–4:30 pm 
Phone/Email Hours (Eastern Time): 
Monday thru Friday: 8:30 am–8:30 pm 
Saturday: 10:00 am–4:00 pm 
Sunday: 12:00 pm–6:00 pm 
Course Specific Standard Statements 
Acceptable Use 
The University of Guelph has an Acceptable Use Policy, which you are expected to 
adhere to. 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/ccs/infosec/aup 
Communicating with Your Instructor 
During the course, your instructor will interact with you on various course matters on the 
course website using the following ways of communication: 
• Announcements: The instructor will use Announcements on the Course Home 
page to provide you with course reminders and updates. Please check this 
section frequently for course updates from your instructor. 
• Ask Your Instructor Discussion: Use this discussion forum to ask questions of 
your instructor about content or course-related issues with which you are 
unfamiliar. If you encounter difficulties, the instructor is here to help you. Please 
post general course-related questions to the discussion forum so that all students 
have an opportunity to review the response. To access this discussion forum, 
select Discussions from the Tools dropdown menu. 
• Email: If you have a conflict that prevents you from completing course 
requirements, or have a question concerning a personal matter, you can send 
your instructor a private message by email. The instructor will respond to your 
email within 48 to 72 hours. 
Netiquette Expectations 
For distance education courses, the course website is considered the classroom and 
the same protections, expectations, guidelines, and regulations used in face-to-face 
Page 15 of 20 
settings apply, plus other policies and considerations that come into play specifically 
because these courses are online. 
Inappropriate online behaviour will not be tolerated. Examples of inappropriate online 
behaviour include: 
• Posting inflammatory messages about your instructor or fellow students; 
• Using obscene or offensive language online; 
• Copying or presenting someone else's work as your own; 
• Adapting information from the Internet without using proper citations or 
references; 
• Buying or selling term papers or assignments; 
• Posting or selling course materials to course notes websites; 
• Having someone else complete your quiz or completing a quiz for/with another 
student; 
• Stating false claims about lost quiz answers or other assignment submissions; 
• Threatening or harassing a student or instructor online; 
• Discriminating against fellow students, instructors, and/or TAs; 
• Using the course website to promote profit-driven products or services; 
• Attempting to compromise the security or functionality of the learning 
management system; and 
• Sharing your username and password. 
Submission of Assignments to Dropbox 
The Financial Planning Assignment, Case Study Assignment and Discussion 2 and 3 
Summaries should be submitted electronically via the online Dropbox tool. When 
submitting your assignments using the Dropbox tool, do not leave the page until your 
assignment has successfully uploaded. To verify that your submission was complete, 
you can view the submission history immediately after the upload to see which files 
uploaded successfully. The system will also email you a receipt. Save this email receipt 
as poof of submission. 
Be sure to keep a back-up copy of all of your assignments in the event that they are lost 
in transition. In order to avoid any last-minute computer problems, your instructor 
strongly recommend you save your assignments to a cloud-based file storage (e.g., 
Google Docs), or send to your email account, so that should something happen to your 
computer, the assignment could still be submitted on time or re-submitted. 
It is your responsibility to submit your assignments on time as specified in the schedule 
section of this outline. Be sure to check the technical requirements and make sure you 
have the proper computer, that you have a supported browser, and that you have 
reliable Internet access. Remember that technical difficulty is not an excuse not to 
Page 16 of 20 
turn in your assignment on time. Don’t wait until the last minute as you may get 
behind in your work. 
If, for some reason, you have a technical difficulty when submitting your assignment 
electronically, please contact your instructor or CourseLink Support. 
http://spaces.uoguelph.ca/ed/contact-us/ 
Late Policy 
If you choose to submit your individual assignments to the Dropbox tool late, the 
penalty would be 5% off each late day.  
Academic considerations will only be given for medical reasons or other extenuating 
circumstances. If you require an extension, discuss it with the instructor as soon as 
possible and well before the due date. Barring exceptional circumstances, extensions 
will not be granted once the due date has passed. These rules are not designed to be 
arbitrary, nor are they inflexible. They are designed to keep you organized, to ensure 
that all students have the same amount of time to work on assignments, and to help to 
return marked materials to you in the shortest possible time. 
Obtaining Grades and Feedback 
Unofficial assessment marks will be available in the Grades tool of the course website.  
Your instructor will have grades posted online within 3 weeks of the submission 
deadline, if the assignment was submitted on time. Once your assignments are marked 
you can view your grades on the course website by selecting Grades from the Tools 
dropdown menu on the navbar. Your course will remain open to you for seven days 
following the last day of the final exam period. 
University of Guelph degree students can access their final grade by logging into 
WebAdvisor (using your U of G central ID). Open Learning program students should log 
in to the OpenEd Student Portal to view their final grade (using the same username and 
password you have been using for your courses). 
https://webadvisor.uoguelph.ca 
https://courses.opened.uoguelph.ca/portal/logon.do?method=load 
Rights and Responsibilities When Learning Online 
For distance education (DE) courses, the course website is considered the classroom 
and the same protections, expectations, guidelines, and regulations used in face-to-face 
settings apply, plus other policies and considerations that come into play specifically 
because these courses are online. 
For more information on your rights and responsibilities when learning in the online 
environment, visit Rights and Responsibilities. 
http://opened.uoguelph.ca/student-resources/rights-and-responsibilities 
Page 17 of 20 
University Standard Statements 
University of Guelph: Undergraduate Policies 
As a student of the University of Guelph, it is important for you to understand your rights 
and responsibilities and the academic rules and regulations that you must abide by. 
If you are a registered University of Guelph Degree Student, consult the 
Undergraduate Calendar for the rules, regulations, curricula, programs and fees for 
current and previous academic years. 
If you are an Open Learning Program Student, consult the Open Learning Program 
Calendar for information about University of Guelph administrative policies, procedures 
and services. 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/ 
http://opened.uoguelph.ca/student-resources/open-learning-program-calendar 
Email Communication 
University of Guelph Degree Students 
As per university regulations, all students are required to check their uoguelph.ca e-mail 
account regularly: e-mail is the official route of communication between the University 
and its students. 
Open Learning Program Students 
Check your email account (the account you provided upon registration) regularly for 
important communications, as this is the primary conduit by which the Open Learning 
and Educational Support will notify you of events, deadlines, announcements or any 
other official information. 
When You Cannot Meet Course Requirements 
When you find yourself unable to meet an in-course requirement due to illness or 
compassionate reasons, please advise your course instructor in writing, with your 
name, ID number and email contact. 
University of Guelph Degree Students 
Consult the Undergraduate Calendar for information on regulations and procedures for 
Academic Consideration. 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-ac.shtml 
Open Learning Program Students 
Page 18 of 20 
Please refer to the Open Learning Program Calendar for information on regulations and 
procedures for requesting Academic Consideration. 
http://opened.uoguelph.ca/student-resources/open-learning-program-calendar 
Drop Date 
University of Guelph Degree Students 
Students will have until the last day of classes to drop courses without academic 
penalty. Review the Undergraduate Calendar for regulations and procedures for 
Dropping Courses. 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-drop.shtml 
Open Learning Program Students 
Please refer to the Open Learning Program Calendar. 
http://opened.uoguelph.ca/student-resources/open-learning-program-calendar 
Copies of Assignments 
Keep paper and/or other reliable back-up copies of all assignments: you may be asked 
to resubmit work at any time. 
Accessibility 
The University of Guelph is committed to creating a barrier-free environment. Providing 
services for students is a shared responsibility among students, faculty and 
administrators. This relationship is based on respect of individual rights, the dignity of 
the individual and the University community's shared commitment to an open and 
supportive learning environment. 
University of Guelph Degree Students 
Students requiring service or accommodation, whether due to an identified, ongoing 
disability or a short-term disability should contact Accessibility Services as soon as 
possible. 
For more information, contact Accessibility Services at 519-824-4120 ext. 56208, email 
Accessibility Services or visit the Accessibility Services website. 
accessibility@uoguelph.ca 
https://wellness.uoguelph.ca/accessibility/ 
Open Learning Program Students 
If you are an Open Learning program student who requires academic accommodation, 
please contact the Academic Assistant to the Director. Please ensure that you contact 
us before the end of the first week of your course (every semester) in order to avoid any 
Page 19 of 20 
delays in support. Documentation from a health professional is required for all academic 
accommodations. Please note that all information provided will be held in confidence. 
If you require textbooks produced in an alternate format (e.g., DAISY, Braille, large print 
or eText), please contact the Academic Assistant to the Director at least two months 
prior to the course start date. If contact is not made within the suggested time frame, 
support may be delayed. It is recommended that you refer to the course outline before 
beginning your course in order to determine the required readings. 
The provision of academic accommodation is a shared responsibility between OpenEd 
and the student requesting accommodation. It is recognized that academic 
accommodations are intended to “level the playing field” for students with disabilities. 
jessica.martin@uoguelph.ca 
Academic Misconduct 
The University of Guelph is committed to upholding the highest standards of academic 
integrity and it is the responsibility of all members of the University community – faculty, 
staff, and students – to be aware of what constitutes academic misconduct and to do as 
much as possible to prevent academic offences from occurring. University of Guelph 
students have the responsibility of abiding by the University's policy on academic 
misconduct regardless of their location of study; faculty, staff and students have the 
responsibility of supporting an environment that discourages misconduct. Students need 
to remain aware that instructors have access to and the right to use electronic and other 
means of detection. 
Please note: Whether or not a student intended to commit academic misconduct is not 
relevant for a finding of guilt. Hurried or careless submission of assignments does not 
excuse students from responsibility for verifying the academic integrity of their work 
before submitting it. Students who are in any doubt as to whether an action on their part 
could be construed as an academic offence should consult with a faculty member or 
faculty advisor. 
The Academic Misconduct Policy is detailed in the Undergraduate Calendar. 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-
amisconduct.shtml 
Copyright Notice 
Content within this course is copyright protected. Third party copyrighted materials 
(such as book chapters and articles) have either been licensed for use in this course, or 
have been copied under an exception or limitation in Canadian Copyright law. 
The fair dealing exemption in Canada's Copyright Act permits students to reproduce 
short excerpts from copyright-protected materials for purposes such as research, 
education, private study, criticism and review, with proper attribution. Any other copying, 
communicating, or distribution of any content provided in this course, except as 
permitted by law, may be an infringement of copyright if done without proper license or 
the consent of the copyright owner. Examples of infringing uses of copyrighted works 
Page 20 of 20 
would include uploading materials to a commercial third party web site, or making paper 
or electronic reproductions of all, or a substantial part, of works such as textbooks for 
commercial purposes. 
Students who upload to CourseLink copyrighted materials such as book chapters, 
journal articles, or materials taken from the Internet, must ensure that they comply with 
Canadian Copyright law or with the terms of the University’s electronic resource 
licenses. 
For more information about students’ rights and obligations with respect to copyrighted 
works, review Fair Dealing Guidance for Students. 
http://www.lib.uoguelph.ca/sites/default/files/fair_dealing_policy_0.pdf 
Plagiarism Detection Software 
Students should be aware that faculty have the right to use software to aid in the 
detection of plagiarism or copying and to examine students orally on submitted work. 
For students found guilty of academic misconduct, serious penalties, up to and including 
suspension or expulsion from the University can be imposed. 
Recording of Materials 
Presentations which are made in relation to course work—including lectures—cannot be 
recorded or copied without the permission of the presenter, whether the instructor, a 
classmate or guest lecturer. Material recorded with permission is restricted to use for 
that course unless further permission is granted. 
