School of Computer Science
University of Guelph
CIS*3530 Data Base Systems and Concepts
Fall 2019
Instructor
Fangju Wang, 3304 Reynolds, X52939, fjwang@uoguelph.ca
Instructor Advisory Hours
Wednesday 02:30-03:30pm Friday 12:30-01:30pm
Calendar Description
This course is a study of data organization and data management principles with the per-
spective of analyzing applications suitable for implementation using a DBMS. This will include
an analysis of several data base models, query specification methods, and query processing
techniques. Overview of several related issues including concurrency control, security, integrity
and recovery. Students will demonstrate concepts through project assignments.
Main Topics
This course provides fundamental concepts and techniques of conventional database systems.
Topics include database models and modeling, relational database model and query languages,
database design theory, query optimization, and transaction management. Students will also
learn skills for application analysis, conceptual database design and implementation using a
DBMS. Additional topics include the object-relational database model, and the Hadoop and
MapReduce systems for big data.
Lab Schedule
0101: Friday 11:30AM-12:20PM, LA Room 204
Sept 13 N Sept 20 N Sept 27 Y (A1) Oct 4 Y (A1)
Oct 11 Y (A2) Oct 18 Y (A2) Oct 25 N Nov 1 Y (A3)
Nov 8 Y (A3) Nov 15 Y (A4) Nov 22 Y (A4) Nov 29 N
Y – lab on the day; N – no lab on the day.
Teaching Assistants
Omar Irfan Khan, Michael Roher, Tyler Laforet, cis3530@socs.uoguelph.ca, TA advisory
hours: TBA.
1
Recommended Textbook:
• R. Elmasri and S. Navathe, Fundamentals of Database Systems (Seventh Edition), Pearson
Education Inc, 2019.
Course Moodle Page URL
http://moodle.socs.uoguelph.ca/
Assignments and Examinations
• Four assignments: 10% + 10% + 10% + 10% = 40%
• Midterm examination: 20%
• Final examination: 40%
The late policy for assignments is: NO late assignment will be accepted.
Evaluation Schedule
• Final examination: Wednesday, December 4, 2019 (07:00pm - 09:00pm)
• Midterm examination: Monday, October 28, 2019 (01:30pm – 02:20pm).
• Assignment due dates:
– Assignment 1: Monday, October 7, 2019
– Assignment 2: Monday, October 21, 2019
– Assignment 3: Monday, November 11, 2019
– Assignment 4: Monday, November 25, 2019
Statements
• E-mail Communication
As per university regulations, all students are required to check their <mail.uoguelph.ca>
e-mail account regularly: e-mail is the official route of communication between the Uni-
versity and its students.
• When You Cannot Meet a Course Requirement
When you find yourself unable to meet an in-course requirement because of illness or
compassionate reasons, please advise the course instructor (or designated person, such
as a teaching assistant) in writing, with your name, id#, and e-mail contact. See the
undergraduate calendar for information on regulations and procedures for Academic Con-
sideration.
2
• Copies of Out-of-class Assignments
Keep paper and/or other reliable back-up copies of all out-of-class assignments: you may
be asked to resubmit work at any time.
• Accessibility
The University promotes the full participation of students who experience disabilities in
their academic programs. To that end, the provision of academic accommodation is a
shared responsibility between the University and the student.
When accommodations are needed, the student is required to first register with Student
Accessibility Services (SAS). Documentation to substantiate the existence of a disabil-
ity is required, however, interim accommodations may be possible while that process is
underway.
Accommodations are available for both permanent and temporary disabilities. It should
be noted that common illnesses such as a cold or the flu do not constitute a disability.
Use of the SAS Exam Centre requires students to book their exams at least 7 days in ad-
vance, and not later than the 40th Class Day. More information: /www.uoguelph.ca/sas/.
• Academic Misconduct
The University of Guelph is committed to upholding the highest standards of academic
integrity and it is the responsibility of all members of the University community faculty,
staff, and students to be aware of what constitutes academic misconduct and to do as
much as possible to prevent academic offences from occurring. University of Guelph stu-
dents have the responsibility of abiding by the University’s policy on academic misconduct
regardless of their location of study; faculty, staff and students have the responsibility of
supporting an environment that discourages misconduct. Students need to remain aware
that instructors have access to and the right to use electronic and other means of detection.
Please note: Whether or not a student intended to commit academic misconduct is
not relevant for a finding of guilt. Hurried or careless submission of assignments does
not excuse students from responsibility for verifying the academic integrity of their work
before submitting it.
Students who are in any doubt as to whether an action on their part could be construed
as an academic offence should consult with a faculty member or faculty advisor.
The Academic Misconduct Policy is detailed in the Undergraduate Calendar.
• Recording of Materials
Presentations which are made in relation to course work, including lectures, cannot be
recorded or copied without the permission of the presenter, whether the instructor, a
classmate or guest lecturer. Material recorded with permission is restricted to use for
that course unless further permission is granted.
• To Appeal a Mark
To appeal a mark of an assignment or the midterm examination you must do so within
two weeks after it is returned.
3
