CIS*3750  - Systems Analysis & Design in Application 
Winter 2020​ – 0.75 Credits (3-2) - M/W/F 9:30am-10:20am MCKN 029 
Course Description 
An introduction to the issues and techniques encountered in the design and construction of 
software systems. The theory and models of software evolution. Topics include requirements and 
specifications, prototyping, design principles, object-oriented analysis and design, standards, 
integration, risk analysis, testing, and debugging. 
This is a 0.75 credit course, so you should expect to a greater weekly time commitment. From 
the calendar, “Under the credit system, credit weight reflects student workload rather than contact 
hours. Students should note that 10 to 12 hours of academic time and effort per week (including 
classes) are expected for a 0.50 credit course.” Therefore, you should expect to spend 15 to 18 hours 
per week on this course. See: 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/current/c08/c08-aload.shtml  
The Academic Calendars are the source of information about the University of Guelph’s 
procedures, policies, and regulations which apply to undergraduate, graduate, and diploma programs. 
You can find more information here: 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/2018-2019/c12/c12cis.shtml 
Learning Outcomes 
1) Collect and critically evaluate client needs to develop software requirements that are 
specific, measurable, and categorized. 
2) Estimate a timeline for software development by identifying dependencies in, establishing a 
prioritized list of, and estimating production time for the software requirements. 
3) Improve system design by collecting and synthesizing client feedback provided during 
prototyping sessions. 
4) Create design artifacts to succinctly communicate software requirements to teammates and 
clients. 
5) Implement and test a systems solution that addresses the client’s needs. 
Prerequisites & Restrictions 
Students enrolled in CIS3750 are expected to have the skills and knowledge covered in 
CIS2750, as well as strong writing skills, the ability to work in teams, and strong communication skills. 
Prerequisite Software Systems Development and Integration CIS*2750 
Restrictions Systems Analysis & Design in Applications CIS*3430 
CIS*3750  - Systems Analysis & Design in Application 
Winter 2020​ – 0.75 Credits (3-2) - M/W/F 9:30am-10:20am MCKN 029 
Schedule, Due Dates and Grade Weights 
Lecture 
You are expected to attend ​every​ class and ​every​ lab (for your own registered section). Lab 
attendance is particularly important because your project group will submit work during of some labs. 
For class, readings will occasionally need to be reviewed before the next class, some of this material 
and related class instruction will appear in your mid-term and final exams. 
Lectures Mon/Wed/Fri 09:30 - 10:20AM MCKN, Room 029 
Lab Section 01 Monday’s 11:30-1:20pm THRN, Room 2420 
Lab Section 02 Tuesday’s 11:30-1:20pm THRN, Room 2420 
Lab Section 03 Tuesday’s 8:30-10:20am THRN, Room 2420 
Course submissions, schedule and weights 
Contact the instructor as soon as possible if you believe that you cannot meet a deliverable 
deadline or write an exam. 
Lab Deliverables  
 Topic Due Date Grade 
Weight 
Checkpoint 1: Lab intro, Design Thinking Fri Jan 17​th​, 1:00pm 5 %  
Checkpoint 2: Personas, User Epics and User Stories Fri Jan 31​st​, 1:00pm 10 %  
Checkpoint 3: Requirements and Use Cases Fri Feb 14​th​, 1:00pm 10 % 
Checkpoint 4: Specs, Schedule & Paper Prototype Demo Fri Feb 28​th​, 1:00pm 10 % 
Final Submission Project Demonstration 
Project Report 
Mon Mar 23​rd ​- ​TBA 
Mon Mar 27th - TBA 
15 % 
10 % 
Exams Total: 60% 
 Midterm #1 Wed Feb 5​th​ in class 10 % 
 Midterm #2 Wed Mar 4​th​ in class 10 % 
 Final Exam Tues Apr 7​th 
08:30AM – 10:30AM 
Location TBA 
20 % 
 Total: 40% 
* The grade for Checkpoint 5 is included with your group’s final project demonstration. 
  
CIS*3750  - Systems Analysis & Design in Application 
Winter 2020​ – 0.75 Credits (3-2) - M/W/F 9:30am-10:20am MCKN 029 
The “50% Rule” 
Important​: The project component of this course is worth 60% and the exam component is 
worth 40%. A failing total in either of these components will result in a final grade equal to the total of 
the failed component, up to a maximum of 45%. If a passing grade is achieved in neither component, 
your grade will be equal to the combined total, up to a max of 45%. 
 
For example, if a student achieved a total project grade of 50/60 and a total exam grade of 
18/40, then their final grade would be 45% (50 + 18 = 68, but 18/40 is < 50%). 
 
If another student achieved a project grade of 29/60 and an exam total of 15/40, then their final 
grade would be 44% (29 + 15 = 44)  
 
Missing an exam or project components will make it a lot harder to pass the course. 
Course Website 
Course material, news, announcements, and grades will be regularly posted to the CIS*3750 
website which can be found on courselink (​http://courselink.uoguelph.ca​). You are responsible for 
checking this website regularly for marks and any urgent communications. 
Lecture Materials 
Selected notes will be posted on the course website as the instructor and TA's have time to 
make them available. You are expected to take your own notes during class and lab times. 
Assignments & Lab Demos 
Assignment and Lab Demo descriptions and rubrics will be made available on the course 
website. Assignments and Lab Demos are to be submitted via the course website, and following the 
rules listed with each assignment/lab demo outline. Failure to follow the strict submission rules will 
result in a grade of 0 being assigned. 
  
CIS*3750  - Systems Analysis & Design in Application 
Winter 2020​ – 0.75 Credits (3-2) - M/W/F 9:30am-10:20am MCKN 029 
Textbooks 
Required Head First Software Development 
Pilone, and Miles 
2008 
Suggested Spring Into Technical Writing for Engineers and Scientists 
Rosenberg 
2005 
Suggested The Mythical Man-Month: Essays on Software Engineering, 2​nd​ ed. 
Brooks 
1995 
Suggested Peopleware: Productive Projects and Teams, 3​rd​ ed. 
DeMarco, & Lister 
1987 
Suggested Managing Humans: Biting and Humorous Tales of a Software Engineering Manager, 3​rd​ ed. 
Lopp 
2​n​d ​ed: 
https://books.scholarsportal.info/uri/ebooks/ebooks2/springer/2013-02-14/1/9781430243151  
2016 
Suggested Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code 1​st​ or 2​nd​ ed. 
http://martinfowler.com  
Fowler 
- 
*​Unfortunately, you’re unlikely to find the suggested titles at either campus bookstore but they 
are readily available from your favourite online bookseller. I have placed copies on reserve at the 
library where the title is available in their collection. 
Instructor’s Office Hours 
Wed, 10:30-11:30pm, by appointment only, Reynolds Room 2206 
I can make additional time available for urgent matters 
  
CIS*3750  - Systems Analysis & Design in Application 
Winter 2020​ – 0.75 Credits (3-2) - M/W/F 9:30am-10:20am MCKN 029 
Roles and Responsibilities 
• ​Communication & Email Policy Major announcements will be posted to the course website. It is your                 
responsibility to check the course website regularly. As per university regulations, all students are required               
to check their mail.uoguelph.ca e-mail account regularly; e-mail is the official route of communication              
between the University and its students. ​Questions and requests must be directed to             
cis3750@socs.uoguelph.ca , communications sent through other means will not be given priority. If             
you have a sensitive request, you should speak to the instructor in person. 
• ​When You Cannot Meet a Course Requirement ​When you find yourself unable to meet an in-course                 
requirement because of illness or compassionate reasons, please advise the course instructor in writing,              
with your name, id#, e-mail contact and a description of how the accommodation you’re requesting will                
affect your other studies (re scheduling, etc). See the Undergraduate Calendar for information on              
regulations and procedures for Academic Consideration. 
• ​Copies of Out-of-Class Assignments ​Keep paper and/or other reliable back-up copies of all out-of-class               
assignments: you may be asked to resubmit work at any time. 
•   ​Disputes If you have a dispute with a group member or a TA, you are encouraged to discuss the                  
matter with the instructor. The instructor will provide conflict resolution if appropriate and more serious               
issues will be referred to the SoCS (Associate) Director, etc. 
• ​Recording of Materials Presentations which are made in relation to course work, including lectures,               
cannot be recorded or copied without the permission of the presenter, whether the instructor, classmate or                
guest lecturer. Material recorded with permission is restricted to use for that course and may not be posted                  
on any public space unless further permission is granted. 
• ​Instructor's Role and Responsibility to Students The instructor’s role is to develop and deliver course                
material in ways that facilitate learning for a variety of students. Selected notes will be made available to                  
students on the course website but are not intended to be standalone. During lectures, the instructor will                 
expand and explain the content of notes and provide example problems that supplement posted notes.               
Scheduled classes will be the principal venue to provide information and feedback for exams and               
assignments. 
• ​Students' Learning Responsibilities Students are expected to take advantage of the learning             
opportunities provided during lectures, labs, and help sessions. Students, especially those having difficulty             
with the course content, should also make use of other resources recommended by the instructor. Students                
who fall behind due to illness, work, or extracurricular activities are advised to keep the instructor informed                 
as early as possible. This will allow the instructor to recommend extra resources in a timely manner and/or                  
provide consideration if appropriate. If you have an SAS accommodation, please consider speaking to the               
instructor about it in private well in advance of any submissions or exams, this will allow us to make better                    
arrangements for you.  
  
CIS*3750  - Systems Analysis & Design in Application 
Winter 2020​ – 0.75 Credits (3-2) - M/W/F 9:30am-10:20am MCKN 029 
Code of Conduct 
Because this class needs to be a participatory community if students are to fulfill their potential 
for learning, people who disrupt the community by their words or actions disrupt that community. 
Rude, sarcastic, obscene, or disrespectful speech and disruptive behaviour have a negative impact on 
everyone’s learning. Aggressive behaviour, bullying, abusive language, sexism, agism, ablism, racism, 
homophobia, transphobia, islamophobia, etc. will not be tolerated. We are all entitled to ask questions 
and hold opinions, but these must be presented in a respectful manner. All discussions must be 
respectful, regardless of how much you disagree with another person or group in the classroom. We 
will refer to and address our peers using their preferred names and preferred gender pronouns. We will 
work towards a space where everyone has a voice, where everyone can be heard, and where everyone 
is accepted and welcomed. 
Our learning environment must be a friendly, safe and welcoming environment for all, 
regardless of ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, ability, socioeconomic status, and religion (or lack 
thereof). As we wish to facilitate and encourage the fullest participation from everyone, this code of 
conduct outlines the expectations for all participants (including the instructor, other staff, etc). See 
http://citizencodeofconduct.org/ 
• ​Expected Behaviour: Members of our community are expected to 1) participate in an authentic and                
active way, and in doing so, contribute to the health and value of our community, 2) exercise consideration                  
and respect in their speech and actions, 3) attempt collaboration before conflict, 4) refrain from demeaning,                
discriminatory, or harassing behaviour and speech, and 5) be mindful of your surroundings and your fellow                
participants, and alert community leaders (e.g. your instructor) if you notice a dangerous situation,              
someone in distress, or violation of this Code of Conduct, even if they seem inconsequential. 
• ​Citizenship & Participation: Communities mirror the societies in which they exist and positive action is                
essential to counteract the many forms of inequality and abuses of power that exist in society. If you see                   
someone who is making an extra effort to ensure our community is welcoming, friendly, and encourages all                 
participants to contribute to the fullest extent, we want to know. 
• ​Unacceptable Behaviour: Unacceptable behaviours include: intimidating, harassing, abusive,         
discriminatory, derogatory or demeaning speech or actions by any participant in our community, either in               
person, online, at any related events, or in one-on-one communications carried out in the context of                
community business. Harassment includes: harmful or prejudicial verbal or written comments related to             
race, religion, disability, gender, sexual orientation; inappropriate use of nudity and/or sexual images in              
public spaces (including computer labs and presentation slides); deliberate intimidation, stalking or            
following; harassing photography or recording; sustained disruption of talks or other events; inappropriate             
physical contact, and unwelcome sexual attention. 
• ​Consequences of Unacceptable Behaviour: Unacceptable behaviour from any community member,           
including the course instructor and those members with decision-making authority, will not be tolerated.              
Anyone asked to stop unacceptable behaviour is expected to comply immediately. If a community member               
CIS*3750  - Systems Analysis & Design in Application 
Winter 2020​ – 0.75 Credits (3-2) - M/W/F 9:30am-10:20am MCKN 029 
engages in unacceptable behaviour, action will be taken to ensure that such behaviour ends, beginning               
with action on the part of the course instructor, and escalating if necessary.  
• ​If You Witness or Are Subject to Unacceptable Behaviour: If you are subject to or witness                 
unacceptable behaviour, or have any other concerns, please notify the course instructor as soon as               
possible. If you feel that the course instructor cannot or will not provide remedy for the situation, please                  
contact any of these alternate  
Resources:  
1) Associate Director, Undergraduate ​ugraddir@socs.uoguelph.ca​, 
2) Director of the School ​director@socs.uoguelph.ca 
3) Associate Dean, Academic ​kgordon@uoguelph.ca 
4) Office of Diversity and Human Rights ​dhrinfo@uoguelph.ca​, or ext 53000), or 5) Campus             
Community Police (ext 52245, for emergencies use ext 2000). 
Class Rules 
● All assignments and project materials should include the course code CIS3750, and where             
applicable – your name and your group’s name, section number, group number, etc. 
● Lab demos are ​mandatory​, and will include feedback from the client (in this case the instructor).                
Lab demos will be graded based on your performance with the client (i.e. the instructor). If you miss                  
a lab demo, you will receive a grade of 0 for the component. 
● Assignments and post-mortem reports are to be uploaded to the course website, and are due as                
indicated on the assignment/report description sheets. The final lab demo’s post mortem will be              
part of the final report. 
● A late project submission with no appropriate justification may be assigned a grade of 0 for all team                  
members.  
● You are expected to take excellent notes during classes and labs. You will need them for your                 
midterm and final exams, as a large portion of the questions will come directly from classroom                
discussion. 
● You are expected to show up to every class, and to every lab. There are 24 classes and 10 labs. 
● If you miss the final exam, you must talk with your academic counsellor and follow University of                 
Guelph policies on this matter. The instructor can not do anything in this situation.  
Academic Integrity 
The University of Guelph is committed to upholding the highest standards of academic integrity and it is the                  
responsibility of all members of the University community faculty, staff, and students to be aware of what                 
constitutes academic misconduct and to do as much as possible to prevent academic offences from               
occurring. University of Guelph students have the responsibility of abiding by the University's policy on               
academic misconduct regardless of their location of study; faculty, staff and students have the responsibility               
CIS*3750  - Systems Analysis & Design in Application 
Winter 2020​ – 0.75 Credits (3-2) - M/W/F 9:30am-10:20am MCKN 029 
of supporting an environment that discourages misconduct. ​All students who take a SOCS course must               
pass the Academic Integrity Self Test. 
For educational purposes, instructors impose conditions on assignments that may limit students’            
permission to collaborate with others or to utilize external sources (including, but not limited to, software,                
data, images, text, etc.). Any permitted utilization must be done with proper references. Aiding and abetting                
is a punishable offence; students must be careful not to help others commit offences by giving out solutions                  
or providing to access computer accounts. Instructors may use automated tools to detect possible cases of                
academic misconduct. 
Please note: Whether or not a student intended to commit academic misconduct is not relevant for a finding                  
of guilt. Hurried or careless submission of assignments does not excuse students from responsibility for               
verifying the academic integrity of their work before submitting it. Students who are in any doubt as to                  
whether an action on their part could be construed as an academic offence should consult with a faculty                  
member. 
• The Academic Misconduct Policy is detailed in the Undergraduate Calendar here:            
https://www.uoguelph.ca/registrar/calendars/undergraduate/2017-2018/c08/c08-amisconduct.shtml 
• The SOCS Academic Integrity Unit i​s here: ​https://moodle.socs.uoguelph.ca/course/view.php?id=2 ​Login          
with your central login credentials. The key to use is “imhonest”. 
accessibility 
The University of Guelph is committed to creating a barrier-free environment. Providing services for              
students is a shared responsibility among students, faculty and administrators. This relationship is based              
on respect of individual rights, the dignity of the individual and the University community’s shared               
commitment to an open and supportive learning environment. Students requiring service or            
accommodation, whether due to an identified, ongoing disability, or for a short-term disability should              
contact Student Accessibility Services (SAS) as soon as possible. 
For more information, contact SAS at 1.519.824.4120 ext 56208 or email csd@uoguelph.ca or see the               
website ​https://wellness.uoguelph.ca/accessibility/​ . 
Health & Wellness 
All members of campus play a role in fostering and promoting a safe, supportive environment, as well as                  
good physical, emotional, spiritual, cultural, and mental health and wellness. 
If you are sick, heartbroken, or exhausted, go home. Work is not more important than your health. -Dr. Max                   
Liboiron 
If you are experiencing any challenges, please do not hesitate to contact the instructor, and know that there                  
are resources on campus set up to help you out. 
Medical concerns? Student Health Services at x52131 
CIS*3750  - Systems Analysis & Design in Application 
Winter 2020​ – 0.75 Credits (3-2) - M/W/F 9:30am-10:20am MCKN 029 
Threats of violence, personal safety? Campus police at x2000 Psychological or emotional concerns?             
Counselling services at x53244 Accessibility concerns? SAS at x56208 
Sexual assault? Campus police at x2000, or counselling services at x53244 Mental Health concerns? 
Other sources are: 
• Student Health Services, Monday to Friday, 8:30am-4:30pm, x52131, J.T. Powell Building 
• Counselling Services, Monday to Friday, 8:15am-4:15pm, x53244, Level 3, University Centre 
• Wellness Education Centre, Monday to Friday, 8:30am-4:30pm, x53327, J.T. Powell Building 
• Student Support Network, Monday to Friday, 12:00pm-10:00pm, Raithby House 
• Campus Community Police, 24/7, x2000, Trent Building 
• Good2Talk, 1.866.925.5454 
• Here 24/7, 1.844.437.3427 
